<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2> Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>mate— i.e. confound, defeat. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>vaunt— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "daunt." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>her— All the quartos "his." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Whereas— i.e. where. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>cunning— i.e. knowledge. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>now— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "more." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Faustus discovered in his study— Most probably, the Chorus, before going out, drew a curtain, and discovered Faustus sitting. In B. Barnes's <i>Divils Charter</i>, 1607, we find; "Scen. Vltima. Alexander vnbraced betwixt two Cardinalls in his study looking vpon a booke, whilst a groome draweth the Curtaine." Sig. L 3. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Analytics, ’tis thou, &amp;c.— Qy. "Analytic"? (but such phraseology was not uncommon). <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>that— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "the" (the printer having mistaken "y<sup>t</sup>" for "y<sup>e</sup>"). <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><em>Economy</em>— So the later quartos (with various spelling).—folio 1604 "Oncaymaeon." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>and— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Couldst— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "Wouldst." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>men— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "man." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>legatur— All the quartos "legatus." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>&amp;c.— So two of the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>law— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "Church." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "His." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Too servile— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "The deuill." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Che sera, sera— Lest it should be thought that I am wrong in not altering the old spelling here, I may quote from Panizzi's very critical edition of the ORLANDO FURIOSO, "La satisfazion ci SERA pronta." C. xviii. st. 67. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>scenes— "And sooner may a gulling weather-spie By drawing forth heavens SCEANES tell certainly," &amp;c. Donne's FIRST SATYRE,—p. 327, ed. 1633. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>tire— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "trie." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter WAGNER, &amp;c.— Perhaps the proper arrangement is, "Wagner! Enter WAGNER. Commend me to my dearest friends," &amp;c. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>treasure— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "treasury." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jove— So again, p. 84, first col.,[See Note 59 : "Seeing Faustus hath incurr'd eternal death By desperate thoughts against JOVE'S deity," &amp;c.: and I may notice that Marlowe is not singular in applying the name JOVE to the God of Christians: "Beneath our standard of JOUES powerfull sonne [i.e. Christ—". MIR. FOR MAGISTRATES, p. 642, ed. 1610. "But see the judgement of almightie JOUE," &amp;c. Id. p. 696. "O sommo GIOVE per noi crocifisso," &amp;c. Pulci,—MORGANTE MAG. C. ii. st. 1. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>these elements— So again, "Within the bowels of THESE elements," &amp;c., p. 87, first col,[See Note 90——"THESE" being equivalent to THE. (Not unfrequently in our old writers THESE is little more than redundant.) <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>resolve— i.e. satisfy, inform. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>silk— All the quartos "skill" (and so the modern editors!). <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>the— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "our." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>the fiery keel at Antwerp's bridge— During the blockade of Antwerp by the Prince of Parma in 1585, "They of Antuerpe knowing that the bridge and the Stocadoes were finished, made a great shippe, to be a meanes to breake all this worke of the prince of Parmaes: this great shippe was made of masons worke within, in the manner of a vaulted caue: vpon the hatches there were layed myll-stones, graue-stones, and others of great weight; and within the vault were many barrels of powder, ouer the which there were holes, and in them they had put matches, hanging at a thred, the which burning vntill they came vnto the thred, would fall into the powder, and so blow vp all. And for that they could not haue any one in this shippe to conduct it, Lanckhaer, a sea captaine of the Hollanders, being then in Antuerpe, gaue them counsell to tye a great beame at the end of it, to make it to keepe a straight course in the middest of the streame. In this sort floated this shippe the fourth of Aprill, vntill that it came vnto the bridge; where (within a while after) the powder wrought his effect, with such violence, as the vessell, and all that was within it, and vpon it, flew in pieces, carrying away a part of the Stocado and of the bridge. The marquesse of Roubay Vicont of Gant, Gaspar of Robles lord of Billy, and the Seignior of Torchies, brother vnto the Seignior of Bours, with many others, were presently slaine; which were torne in pieces, and dispersed abroad, both vpon the land and vpon the water." Grimeston's GENERALL HISTORIE OF THE NETHERLANDS, p. 875, ed. 1609. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>only— Qy. "alone"? (This line is not in the later quartos.) <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>vile— Old ed. "vild": but see note ||, p. 68.—(This line is not in the later quartos.) <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note || from page 68 (The Second Part of Tamburlaine the Great): Vile— The 8vo "Vild"; the quarto "Wild" (Both eds. a little before, have "VILE monster, born of some infernal hag", and, a few lines after, "To VILE and ignominious servitude":—the fact is, our early writers (or rather transcribers), with their usual inconsistency of spelling, give now the one form, and now the other: compare the folio SHAKESPEARE, 1623, where we sometimes find "vild" and sometimes "VILE.")— </pre>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>concise syllogisms— Old ed. "Consissylogismes." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>cunning— i.e. knowing, skilful. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Agrippa— i.e. Cornelius Agrippa. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>shadow— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "shadowes." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>spirits— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "subiects." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Almain rutters— See note ***, p. 43. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note *** from p. 43. (The Second Part of Tamburlaine the Great): Almains, Rutters— Rutters are properly—German troopers (reiter, reuter). In the third speech after the present one this line is repeated VERBATIM: but in the first scene of our author's FAUSTUS we have, "Like ALMAIN RUTTERS with their horsemen's staves."— </pre>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>have the— So two of the later quartos.—folio 1604 "in their." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "For." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>in— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>renowm'd— See note ||, p. 11. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note || from p. 11. (The First Part of Tamburlaine the Great): renowmed— i.e. renowned.—So the 8vo.—The quarto "renowned." —The form "RENOWMED" (Fr. RENOMME) occurs repeatedly afterwards in this play, according to the 8vo. It is occasionally found in writers posterior to Marlowe's time. e.g. "Of Constantines great towne RENOUM'D in vaine." Verses to King James, prefixed to Lord Stirling's MONARCHICKE TRAGEDIES, ed. 1607.— </pre>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Albertus'— i.e. Albertus Magnus.—The correction of I. M. in Gent. Mag. for Jan. 1841.—All the quartos "Albanus." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>cunning— i.e. skill. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter two SCHOLARS— Scene, perhaps, supposed to be before Faustus's house, as Wagner presently says, "My master is within at dinner." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>upon— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "vpon't." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>speak, would— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "speake, IT would." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>my dear brethren— This repetition (not found in the later quartos) is perhaps an error of the original compositor. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter FAUSTUS to conjure— The scene is supposed to be a grove; see p. 81, last line of sec. col. [Page 81, second column, last line: "VALDES. Then haste thee to some solitary grove,"— <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>anagrammatiz'd— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "and Agramithist." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Th' abbreviated— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "The breuiated." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>erring— i.e. wandering. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>surgat Mephistophilis, quod tumeraris— The later quartos have "surgat Mephistophilis DRAGON, quod tumeraris."—There is a corruption here, which seems to defy emendation. For "quod TUMERARIS," Mr. J. Crossley, of Manchester, would read (rejecting the word "Dragon") "quod TU MANDARES" (the construction being "quod tu mandares ut Mephistophilis appareat et surgat"): but the "tu" does not agree with the preceding "vos."—The Revd. J. Mitford proposes "surgat Mephistophilis, per Dragon (or Dagon) quod NUMEN EST AERIS." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>dicatus— So two of the later quartos.—folio 1604 "dicatis." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Re-enter Mephistophilis, &amp;c.— According to THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, on which this play is founded, Faustus raises Mephistophilis in "a thicke wood neere to Wittenberg, called in the German tongue Spisser Wolt..... Presently, not three fathom above his head, fell a flame in manner of a lightning, and changed itselfe into a globe..... Suddenly the globe opened, and sprung up in the height of a man; so burning a time, in the end it converted to the shape of a fiery man[?— This pleasant beast ran about the circle a great while, and, lastly, appeared in the manner of a Gray Fryer, asking Faustus what was his request?" Sigs. A 2, A 3, ed. 1648. Again; "After Doctor Faustus had made his promise to the devill, in the morning betimes he called the spirit before him, and commanded him that he should alwayes come to him like a fryer after the order of Saint Francis, with a bell in his hand like Saint Anthony, and to ring it once or twice before he appeared, that he might know of his certaine coming." Id. Sig. A 4. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>came hither— So two of the later quartos.—folio 1604 "came NOW hither." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>accidens— So two of the later quartos.—folio 1604 "accident." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it— Compare Milton, Par. Lost, iv. 75; "Which way I fly is hell; myself am hell." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>these— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "those." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jove's— See note ****, p. 80. [i.e. Note 24 :  <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>four and twenty— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "24." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>resolve— i.e. satisfy, inform. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>thorough— So one of the later quartos.—folio 1604 "through." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>country— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "land." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>desir'd— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "desire." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter WAGNER, &amp;c.— Scene, a street most probably. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>pickadevaunts— i.e. beards cut to a point. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>by'r lady— i.e. by our Lady. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Qui mihi discipulus— The first words of W. Lily's AD DISCIPULOS CARMEN DE MORIBUS, <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>"Qui mihi discipulus, puer, es, cupis atque doceri, Huc ades," &amp;c. </pre>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>staves-acre— A species of larkspur. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>vermin— Which the seeds of staves-acre were used to destroy. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>familiars— i.e. attendant-demons. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>their— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "my." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>slop— i.e. wide breeches. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>vile— Old ed. "vild." See note || p. 68. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note || from page 68 (The Second Part of Tamburlaine the Great): Vile— The 8vo "Vild"; the quarto "Wild" (Both eds. a little before, have "VILE monster, born of some infernal hag", and, a few lines after, "To VILE and ignominious servitude":—the fact is, our early writers (or rather transcribers), with their usual inconsistency of spelling, give now the one form, and now the other: compare the folio SHAKESPEARE, 1623, where we sometimes find "vild" and sometimes "VILE.") </pre>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>vestigiis nostris— All the quartos "vestigias nostras." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>of— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>me— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>he lives— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "I liue." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>why— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Solamen miseris, &amp;c.— An often-cited line of modern Latin poetry: by whom it was written I know not. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Why— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>torture— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "tortures." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Faustus— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bill— i.e. writing, deed. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Here's fire; come, Faustus, set it on— This would not be intelligible without the assistance of THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, the sixth chapter of which is headed,—"How Doctor Faustus set his blood in a saucer on warme ashes, and writ as followeth." Sig. B, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>But what is this inscription, &amp;c.— "He [Faustus— tooke a small penknife and prickt a veine in his left hand; and for certainty thereupon were seen on his hand these words written, as if they had been written with blood, O HOMO, FUGE." THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, Sig. B, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>me— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "thee." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>he desires— Not in any of the four quartos. In the tract just cited, the "3d Article" stands thus,—"That Mephostophiles should bring him any thing, and doe for him whatsoever." Sig. A 4, ed. 1648. A later ed. adds "he desired." Marlowe, no doubt, followed some edition of the HISTORY in which these words, or something equivalent to them, had been omitted by mistake. (folio 1661, which I consider as of no authority, has "he requireth.") <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>that, &amp;c.— So all the quartos, ungrammatically. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>these— See note §, p. 80.[i.e. Note 25 :  <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>there— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>are— So two of the later quartos.—folio 1604 "is." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>fond— i.e. foolish. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>What! walking, disputing, &amp;c.— The later quartos have "What, SLEEPING, EATING, walking, AND disputing!" But it is evident that this speech is not given correctly in any of the old eds. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>let me have a wife, &amp;c.— The ninth chapter of THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS narrates "How Doctor Faustus would have married, and how the Devill had almost killed him for it," and concludes as follows. "It is no jesting [said Mephistophilis— with us: hold thou that which thou hast vowed, and we will peforme as we have promised; and more shall that, thou shalt have thy hearts desire of what woman soever thou wilt, be she alive or dead, and so long as thou wilt thou shalt keep her by thee.—These words pleased Faustus wonderfull well, and repented himself that he was so foolish to wish himselfe married, that might have any woman in the whole city brought him at his command; the which he practised and persevered in a long time." Sig. B 3, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>me— Not in quarto 1604. (This line is wanting in the later quartos.) <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>no— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Saba— i.e. Sabaea—the Queen of Sheba. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>iterating— i.e. reciting, repeating. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>And argue of divine astrology, &amp;c.— In THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, there are several tedious pages on the subject; but our dramatist, in the dialogue which follows, has no particular obligations to them. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>erring— i.e. wandering. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>freshmen's— "A Freshman, tiro, novitius." Coles's DICT. Properly, a student during his first term at the university. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>resolve— i.e. satisfy, inform. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Seek to save— Qy. "Seek THOU to save"? But see note ||, p. 18. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note ||, from page 18 (The First Part of Tamburlaine The Great): Barbarous— Qy. "O Barbarous"? in the next line but one, "O treacherous"? and in the last line of the speech, "O bloody"? But we occasionally find in our early dramatists lines which are defective in the first syllable; and in some of these instances at least it would almost seem that nothing has been omitted by the transcriber or printer.— </pre>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter the SEVEN DEADLY SINS— In THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, Lucifer amuses Faustus, not by calling up the Seven Deadly Sins, but by making various devils appear before him, "one after another, in forme as they were in hell." "First entered Beliall in forme of a beare," &amp;c.—"after him came Beelzebub, in curled haire of a horseflesh colour," &amp;c.—"then came Astaroth, in the forme of a worme," &amp;c. &amp;c. During this exhibition, "Lucifer himselfe sate in manner of a man all hairy, but of browne colour, like a squirrell, curled, and his tayle turning upward on his backe as the squirrels use: I think he could crack nuts too like a squirrell." Sig. D, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>case— i.e. couple. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>bevers— i.e. refreshments between meals. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>L.— All the quartos "Lechery."—Here I have made the alteration recommended by Mr. Collier in his Preface to COLERIDGE'S SEVEN LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE AND MILTON, p. cviii. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Away, to hell, to hell— In quarto 1604, these words stand on a line by themselves, without a prefix. (In the later quartos, the corresponding passage is as follows; "——— begins with Lechery. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>LUCIFER. Away to hell, away! On, piper! [Exeunt the SINS. FAUSTUS. O, how this sight doth delight my soul!" &amp;c.) </pre>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>I will send for thee at midnight— In THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, we have a particular account of Faustus's visit to the infernal regions, Sig. D 2, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter CHORUS— Old ed. "Enter WAGNER solus." That these lines belong to the Chorus would be evident enough, even if we had no assistance here from the later quartos.—The parts of Wagner and of the Chorus were most probably played by the same actor: and hence the error. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Learned Faustus, To know the secrets of astronomy, &amp;c.— See the 21st chapter of THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS,—"How Doctor Faustus was carried through the ayre up to the heavens, to see the whole world, and how the sky and planets ruled," &amp;c. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS— Scene, the Pope's privy-chamber. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Trier— i.e. Treves or Triers. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From Paris next, &amp;c.— This description is from THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS; "He came from Paris to Mentz, where the river of Maine falls into the Rhine: notwithstanding he tarried not long there, but went into Campania, in the kingdome of Neapol, in which he saw an innumerable sort of cloysters, nunries, and churches, and great houses of stone, the streets faire and large, and straight forth from one end of the towne to the other as a line; and all the pavement of the city was of bricke, and the more it rained into the towne, the fairer the streets were: there saw he the tombe of Virgill, and the highway that he cu[t through the mighty hill of stone in one night, the whole length of an English mile," &amp;c. Sig. E 2, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The way he cut, &amp;c.— During the middle ages Virgil was regarded as a great magician, and much was written concerning his exploits in that capacity. The LYFE OF VIRGILIUS, however, (see Thoms's EARLY PROSE ROMANCES, vol. ii.,) makes no mention of the feat in question. But Petrarch speaks of it as follows. "Non longe a Puteolis Falernus collis attollitur, famoso palmite nobilis. Inter Falernum et mare mons est saxeus, hominum manibus confossus, quod vulgus insulsum a Virgilio magicis cantaminibus factum putant: ita clarorum fama hominum, non veris contenta laudibus, saepe etiam fabulis viam facit. De quo cum me olim Robertus regno clarus, sed praeclarus ingenio ac literis, quid sentirem, multis astantibus, percunctatus esset, humanitate fretus regia, qua non reges modo sed homines vicit, jocans nusquam me legisse magicarium fuisse Virgilium respondi: quod ille severissimae nutu frontis approbans, non illic magici sed ferri vestigia confessus est. Sunt autem fauces excavati montis angustae sed longissimae atque atrae: tenebrosa inter horrifica semper nox: publicum iter in medio, mirum et religioni proximum, belli quoque immolatum temporibus, sic vero populi vox est, et nullis unquam latrociniis attentatum, patet: Criptam Neapolitanam dicunt, cujus et in epistolis ad Lucilium Seneca mentionem fecit. Sub finem fusci tramitis, ubi primo videri coelum incipit, in aggere edito, ipsius Virgilii busta visuntur, pervetusti operis, unde haec forsan ab illo perforati montis fluxit opinio." ITINERARIUM SYRIACUM,—OPP. p. 560, ed. Bas. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest, In one of which a sumptuous temple stands, &amp;c.— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "In MIDST of which," &amp;c.—THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS shews WHAT "sumptuous temple" is meant: "From thence he came to Venice....He wondred not a little at the fairenesse of S. Marks Place, and the sumptuous church standing thereon, called S. Marke, how all the pavement was set with coloured stones, and all the rood or loft of the church double gilded over." Sig. E 2, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Just through the midst, &amp;c.— This and the next line are not in quarto 1604. I have inserted them from the later quartos, as being absolutely necessary for the sense. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ponte— All the quartos "Ponto." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>of— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Then charm me, that I, &amp;c.— A corrupted passage.—Compare THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, Sig. E 3, ed. 1648; where, however, the Cardinal, whom the Pope entertains, is called the Cardinal of PAVIA. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sonnet— Variously written, SENNET, SIGNET, SIGNATE, &amp;c.—A particular set of notes on the trumpet, or cornet, different from a flourish. See Nares's GLOSS. in V. SENNET. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter ROBIN, &amp;c.— Scene, near an inn. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>ippocras— Or HIPPOCRAS,—a medicated drink composed of wine (usually red) with spices and sugar. It is generally supposed to have been so called from HIPPOCRATES (contracted by our earliest writers to HIPPOCRAS); perhaps because it was strained,—the woollen bag used by apothecaries to strain syrups and decoctions for clarification being termed HIPPOCRATES' SLEEVE. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>tabern— i.e. tavern. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>[Exeunt. Enter ROBIN and RALPH, &amp;c.— A scene is evidently wanting after the Exeunt of Robin and Ralph. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>purchase— i.e. booty—gain, acquisition. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Drawer— There is an inconsistency here: the Vintner cannot properly be addressed as "Drawer." The later quartos are also inconsistent in the corresponding passage: Dick says, "THE VINTNER'S BOY follows us at the hard heels," and immediately the "VINTNER" enters. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>tone— i.e. the one. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>MEPHIST— Monarch of hell, &amp;c.— Old ed. thus:— <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>"MEPHIST. Vanish vilaines, th' one like an Ape, an other like a Beare, the third an Asse, for doing this enterprise. Monarch of hell, vnder whose blacke suruey," &amp;c. </pre>
			<p>What follows, shews that the words which I have omitted ought to have no place in the text; nor is there any thing equivalent to them in the corresponding passage of the play as given in the later quartos.</p>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter EMPEROR, &amp;c.— Scene—An apartment in the Emperor's Palace. According to THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, the Emperor "was personally, with the rest of the nobles and gentlemen, at the towne of Inzbrack, where he kept his court." Sig. G, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Master Doctor Faustus, &amp;c— The greater part of this scene is closely borrowed from the history just cited: e.g. "Faustus, I have heard much of thee, that thou art excellent in the black art, and none like thee in mine empire; for men say that thou hast a familiar spirit with thee, and that thou canst doe what thou list; it is therefore (said the Emperor) my request of thee, that thou let me see a proofe of thy experience: and I vow unto thee, by the honour of my emperiall crowne, none evill shall happen unto thee for so doing," &amp;c. Ibid. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>won— May be right: but qy. "done"? <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As we that do succeed, &amp;c.— A corrupted passage (not found in the later quartos). <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The bright, &amp;c.— See note ||, p. 18. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note ||, from page 18 (The First Part of Tamburlaine The Great): Barbarous— Qy. "O Barbarous"? in the next line but one, "O treacherous"? and in the last line of the speech, "O bloody"? But we occasionally find in our early dramatists lines which are defective in the first syllable; and in some of these instances at least it would almost seem that nothing has been omitted by the transcriber or printer.— </pre>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>But, if it like your grace, it is not in my ability, &amp;c. "D. Faustus answered, My most excellent lord, I am ready to accomplish your request in all things, so farre forth as I and my spirit are able to performe: yet your majesty shall know that their dead bodies are not able substantially to be brought before you; but such spirits as have seene Alexander and his Paramour alive shall appeare unto you, in manner and form as they both lived in their most flourishing time; and herewith I hope to please your Imperiall Majesty. Then Faustus went a little aside to speake to his spirit; but he returned againe presently, saying, Now, if it please your Majesty, you shall see them; yet, upon this condition, that you demand no question of them, nor speake unto them; which the Emperor agreed unto. Wherewith Doctor Faustus opened the privy-chamber doore, where presently entered the great and mighty emperor Alexander Magnus, in all things to looke upon as if he had beene alive; in proportion, a strong set thicke man, of a middle stature, blacke haire, and that both thicke and curled, head and beard, red cheekes, and a broad face, with eyes like a basiliske; he had a compleat harnesse (i.e. suit of armour) burnished and graven, exceeding rich to look upon: and so, passing towards the Emperor Carolus, he made low and reverend courtesie: whereat the Emperour Carolus would have stood up to receive and greet him with the like reverence; but Faustus tooke hold on him, and would not permit him to doe it. Shortly after, Alexander made humble reverence, and went out againe; and comming to the doore, his paramour met him. She comming in made the Emperour likewise reverence: she was cloathed in blew velvet, wrought and imbroidered with pearls and gold; she was also excellent faire, like milke and blood mixed, tall and slender, with a face round as an apple. And thus passed [she— certaine times up and downe the house; which the Emperor marking, said to himselfe, Now have I seene two persons which my heart hath long wished to behold; and sure it cannot otherwise be (said he to himselfe) but that the spirits have changed themselves into these formes, and have but deceived me, calling to minde the woman that raised the prophet Samuel: and for that the Emperor would be the more satisfied in the matter, he said, I have often heard that behind, in her neck, she had a great wart or wen; wherefore he tooke Faustus by the hand without any words, and went to see if it were also to be seene on her or not; but she, perceiving that he came to her, bowed downe her neck, when he saw a great wart; and hereupon she vanished, leaving the Emperor and the rest well contented." THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, Sig. G, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>both— Old ed. "best." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mephistophilis, transform him straight— According to THE HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, the knight was not present during Faustus's "conference" with the Emperor; nor did he offer the doctor any insult by doubting his skill in magic. We are there told that Faustus happening to see the knight asleep, "leaning out of a window of the great hall," fixed a huge pair of hart's horns on his head; "and, as the knight awaked, thinking to pull in his head, he hit his hornes against the glasse, that the panes thereof flew about his eares: thinke here how this good gentleman was vexed, for he could neither get backward nor forward." After the emperor and the courtiers, to their great amusement, had beheld the poor knight in this condition, Faustus removed the horns. When Faustus, having taken leave of the emperor, was a league and a half from the city, he was attacked in a wood by the knight and some of his companions: they were in armour, and mounted on fair palfreys; but the doctor quickly overcame them by turning all the bushes into horsemen, and "so charmed them, that every one, knight and other, for the space of a whole moneth, did weare a paire of goates hornes on their browes, and every palfry a paire of oxe hornes on his head; and this was their penance appointed by Faustus." A second attempt of the knight to revenge himself on Faustus proved equally unsuccessful. Sigs. G 2, I 3, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>FAUSTUS. Now Mephistophilis, &amp;c.— Here the scene is supposed to be changed to the "fair and pleasant green" which Faustus presently mentions. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Horse-courser— i.e. Horse-dealer.—We are now to suppose the scene to be near the home of Faustus, and presently that it is the interior of his house, for he falls asleep in his chair.—"How Doctor Faustus deceived a Horse-courser" is related in a short chapter (the 34th) of THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS: "After this manner he served a horse-courser at a faire called Pheiffering," &amp;c. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>for forty— Qy. "for TWICE forty DOLLARS"? <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>into— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "vnto." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Doctor Lopus— i.e. Doctor Lopez, domestic physician to Queen Elizabeth, who was put to death for having received a bribe from the court of Spain to destroy her. He is frequently mentioned in our early dramas: see my note on Middleton's WORKS, iv. 384. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>know of— The old ed. has "KNOWNE of"; which perhaps is right, meaning—acquainted with. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>hey-pass— Equivalent to—juggler. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>ostry— i.e. inn,—lodging. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>cunning— i.e. skill. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>[Exeunt. Enter the DUKE OF VANHOLT, the DUCHESS, and FAUSTUS— Old ed.; <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>"Exeunt. Enter to them the DUKE, the DUTCHESS, the DUKE speakes." </pre>
			<p>In the later quartos a scene intervenes between the "Exeunt" of Faustus, Mephistophilis, and Wagner, and the entrance of the Duke of Vanholt, &amp;c.—We are to suppose that Faustus is now at the court of the Duke of Vanholt: this is plain, not only from the later quartos, —in which Wagner tells Faustus that the Duke "hath sent some of his men to attend him, with provision fit for his journey,"—but from THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, the subjoined portion of which is closely followed in the present scene. "Chap. xxxix. HOW DOCTOR FAUSTUS PLAYED A MERRY JEST WITH THE DUKE OF ANHOLT IN HIS COURT. Doctor Faustus on a time went to the Duke of Anholt, who welcommed him very courteously; this was the moneth of January; where sitting at the table, he perceived the dutchess to be with child; and forbearing himselfe untill the meat was taken from the table, and that they brought in the banqueting dishes [i.e. the dessert—, Doctor Faustus said to the dutchesse, Gratious lady, I have alwayes heard that great-bellied women doe alwayes long for some dainties; I beseech therefore your grace, hide not your minde from me, but tell me what you desire to eat. She answered him, Doctor Faustus, now truly I will not hide from you what my heart doth most desire; namely, that, if it were now harvest, I would eat my bellyfull of grapes and other dainty fruit. Doctor Faustus answered hereupon, Gracious lady, this is a small thing for me to doe, for I can doe more than this. Wherefore he tooke a plate, and set open one of the casements of the window, holding it forth; where incontinent he had his dish full of all manner of fruit, as red and white grapes, peares, and apples, the which came from out of strange countries: all these he presented the dutchesse, saying, Madam, I pray you vouchsafe to taste of this dainty fruit, the which came from a farre countrey, for there the summer is not yet ended. The dutchesse thanked Faustus highly, and she fell to her fruit with full appetite. The Duke of Anholt notwithstanding could not withhold to ask Faustus with what reason there were such young fruit to be had at that time of the yeare. Doctor Faustus told him, May it please your grace to understand that the year is divided into two circles of the whole world, that when with us it is winter, in the contrary circle it is notwithstanding summer; for in India and Saba there falleth or setteth the sunne, so that it is so warm that they have twice a yeare fruit; and, gracious lord, I have a swift spirit, the which can in the twinkling of an eye fulfill my desire in any thing; wherefore I sent him into those countries, who hath brought this fruit as you see: whereat the duke was in great admiration."</p>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Saba— i.e. Sabaea. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>beholding— i.e. beholden. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter WAGNER— Scene, a room in the house of Faustus. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>he hath given to me all his goods— Compare chap. lvi. of THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS,—"How Doctor Faustus made his will, in which he named his servant Wagner to be his heire." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>HELEN passeth over the stage— In THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS we have the following description of Helen. "This lady appeared before them in a most rich gowne of purple velvet, costly imbrodered; her haire hanged downe loose, as faire as the beaten gold, and of such length that it reached downe to her hammes; having most amorous cole-black eyes, a sweet and pleasant round face, with lips as red as a cherry; her cheekes of a rose colour, her mouth small, her neck white like a swan; tall and slender of personage; in summe, there was no imperfect place in her: she looked round about with a rolling hawkes eye, a smiling and wanton countenance, which neere-hand inflamed the hearts of all the students; but that they perswaded themselves she was a spirit, which made them lightly passe away such fancies." Sig. H 4, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter an OLD MAN— See chap. xlviii of THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS,—"How an old man, the neighbour of Faustus, sought to perswade him to amend his evil life and to fall into repentance," —according to which history, the Old Man's exhortation is delivered at his own house, whither he had invited Faustus to supper. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>vild— Old ed. "vild." See note ||, p. 68. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>[Note || from page 68 (The Second Part of Tamburlaine the Great): Vile— The 8vo "Vild"; the quarto "Wild" (Both eds. a little before, have "VILE monster, born of some infernal hag", and, a few lines after, "To VILE and ignominious servitude":—the fact is, our early writers (or rather transcribers), with their usual inconsistency of spelling, give now the one form, and now the other: compare the folio SHAKESPEARE, 1623, where we sometimes find "vild" and sometimes "VILE.")— </pre>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>sin— Old ed. "sinnes" (This is not in the later quartos). <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>almost— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>now— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>MEPHIST. Do it, then, quickly, &amp;c.— After this speech, most probably, there ought to be a stage-direction, "FAUSTUS STABS HIS ARM, AND WRITES ON A PAPER WITH HIS BLOOD. Compare THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, chap. xlix,—"How Doctor Faustus wrote the second time with his owne blood, and gave it to the Devill." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>One thing, good servant, &amp;c.— "To the end that this miserable Faustus might fill the lust of his flesh and live in all manner of voluptuous pleasure, it came in his mind, after he had slept his first sleepe, and in the 23 year past of his time, that he had a great desire to lye with faire Helena of Greece, especially her whom he had seen and shewed unto the students at Wittenberg: wherefore he called unto his spirit Mephostophiles, commanding him to bring to him the faire Helena; which he also did. Whereupon he fell in love with her, and made her his common concubine and bed-fellow; for she was so beautifull and delightfull a peece, that he could not be one houre from her, if he should therefore have suffered death, she had so stoln away his heart: and, to his seeming, in time she was with childe, whom Faustus named Justus Faustus. The childe told Doctor Faustus many things which were don in forraign countrys; but in the end, when Faustus lost his life, the mother and the childe vanished away both together." THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, Sig. I 4, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Those— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "These." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Faustus, this— Qy. "This, Faustus"? <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>topless— i.e. not exceeded in height by any. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>is— So the later quartos.—folio 1604 "be." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>shalt— So all the quartos; and so I believe Marlowe wrote, though the grammar requires "shall." <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter the OLD MAN— Scene, a room in the Old Man's house. —In THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS the Old Man makes himself very merry with the attempts of the evil powers to hurt him. "About two dayes after that he had exhorted Faustus, as the poore man lay in his bed, suddenly there was a mighty rumbling in the chamber, the which he was never wont to heare, and he heard as it had beene the groaning of a sow, which lasted long: whereupon the good old man began to jest and mocke, and said, Oh, what a barbarian cry is this? Oh faire bird, what foul musicke is this? A[h—, faire angell, that could not tarry two dayes in his place! beginnest thou now to runne into a poore mans house, where thou hast no power, and wert not able to keepe thy owne two dayes? With these and such like words the spirit departed," &amp;c. Sig. I 2, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enter Faustus, &amp;c.— Scene, a room in the house of Faustus. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>cunning— i.e. knowledge, skill. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Why did not Faustus tell us of this before, &amp;c.— "Wherefore one of them said unto him, Ah, friend Faustus, what have you done to conceale this matter so long from us? We would, by the helpe of good divines and the grace of God, have brought you out of this net, and have torne you out of the bondage and chaines of Satan; whereas now we feare it is too late, to the utter ruine both of your body and soule. Doctor Faustus answered, I durst never doe it, although I often minded to settle my life [myself?— to godly people to desire counsell and helpe; and once mine old neighbour counselled me that I should follow his learning and leave all my conjurations: yet, when I was minded to amend and to follow that good mans counsell, then came the Devill and would have had me away, as this night he is like to doe, and said, so soone as I turned againe to God, he would dispatch me altogether." THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, Sig. K 3, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>save— So the later quartos.—Not in quarto 1604. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>and what noise soever ye hear, &amp;c.— "Lastly, to knit up my troubled oration, this is my friendly request, that you would go to rest, and let nothing trouble you; also, if you chance heare any noyse or rumbling about the house, be not therewith afraid, for there shall no evill happen unto you," &amp;c. THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, ubi supra. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>O lente, &amp;c. "At si, quem malles, Cephalum complexa teneres, Clamares, LENTE CURRITE, NOCTIS EQUI." Ovid,—AMOR. i. xiii. 39. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>That, when you, &amp;c.— So all the old eds.; and it is certain that awkward changes of person are sometimes found in passages of our early poets: but qy., <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			<pre>"That, when THEY vomit forth into the air, My limbs may issue from THEIR smoky mouths," &amp;c.? </pre>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>and I be chang'd Unto some brutish beast— "Now, thou Faustus, damned wretch, how happy wert thou, if, as an unreasonable beast, thou mightest dye without [a— soule! so shouldst thou not feele any more doubts," &amp;c. THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, Sig. K. ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Exeunt DEVILS with FAUSTUS— In THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, his "miserable and lamentable end" is described as follows: it took place, we are informed, at "the village called Rimlich, halfe a mile from Wittenberg."—"The students and the other that were there, when they had prayed for him, they wept, and so went forth; but Faustus tarried in the hall; and when the gentlemen were laid in bed, none of them could sleepe, for that they att[e—nded to heare if they might be privy of his end. It happened that betweene twelve and one a clocke at midnight, there blew a mighty storme of winde against the house, as though it would have blowne the foundation thereof out of his place. Hereupon the students began to feare and goe out of their beds, comforting one another; but they would not stirre out of the chamber; and the host of the house ran out of doores, thinking the house would fall. The students lay neere unto the hall wherein Doctor Faustus lay, and they heard a mighty noyse and hissing, as if the hall had beene full of snakes and adders. With that, the hall-doore flew open, wherein Doctor Faustus was, that he began to cry for helpe, saying, Murther, murther! but it came forth with halfe a voyce, hollowly: shortly after, they heard him no more. But when it was day, the students, that had taken no rest that night, arose and went into the hall, in the which they left Doctor Faustus; where notwithstanding they found not Faustus, but all the hall lay sprinkled with blood, his braines cleaving to the wall, for the devill had beaten him from one wall against another; in one corner lay his eyes, in another his teeth; a pittifull and fearefull sight to behold. Then began the students to waile and weepe for him, and sought for his body in many places. Lastly, they came into the yard, where they found his body lying on the horse-dung, most monstrously torne and fearefull to behold, for his head and all his joynts were dashed in peeces. The fore-named students and masters that were at his death, have obtained so much, that they buried him in the village where he was so grievously tormented. After the which they returned to Wittenberg; and comming into the house of Faustus, they found the servant of Faustus very sad, unto whom they opened all the matter, who tooke it exceeding heavily. There found they also this history of Doctor Faustus noted and of him written, as is before declared, all save only his end, the which was after by the students thereto annexed; further, what his servant had noted thereof, was made in another booke. And you have heard that he held by him in his life the spirit of faire Helena, the which had by him one sonne, the which he named Justus Faustus: even the same day of his death they vanished away, both mother and sonne. The house before was so darke that scarce any body could abide therein. The same night Doctor Faustus appeared unto his servant lively, and shewed unto him many secret things, the which he had done and hidden in his lifetime. Likewise there were certaine which saw Doctor Faustus looke out of the window by night, as they passed by the house." Sig. K 3, ed. 1648. <a href="the-play.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
