<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Scene XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-14" epub:type="z3998:scene z3998:verse">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
			</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> with two or three <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Scholars</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
						<td>
							<p>Master Doctor Faustus, since our conference about fair ladies, which was the beautifulest in all the world, we have determined with ourselves that Helen of Greece was the admirablest lady that ever lived: therefore, Master Doctor, if you will do us that favour, as to let us see that peerless dame of Greece, whom all the world admires for majesty, we should think ourselves much beholding unto you.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Gentlemen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For that I know your friendship is unfeigned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Faustus’ custom is not to deny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The just requests of those that wish him well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No otherways for pomp and majesty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than when Sir Paris crossed the seas with her,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be silent, then, for danger is in words.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Music sounds, and <em>Helen</em> passeth over the stage.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom all the world admires for majesty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Scholar</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>No marvel though the angry Greeks pursued</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With ten years’ war the rape of such a queen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose heavenly beauty passeth all compare.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Since we have seen the pride of Nature’s works,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And only paragon of excellence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us depart; and for this glorious deed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Happy and blest be Faustus evermore!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Gentlemen, farewell⁠—the same I wish to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Scholars</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter an <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ah, Doctor Faustus, that I might prevail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To guide thy steps unto the way of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By which sweet path thou may’st attain the goal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shall conduct thee to celestial rest!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Break heart, drop blood, and mingle it with tears,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tears falling from repentant heaviness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thy most vile and loathsome filthiness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stench whereof corrupts the inward soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With such flagitious crimes of heinous sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As no commiseration may expel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But mercy, Faustus, of thy Saviour sweet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose blood alone must wash away thy guilt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Where art thou, Faustus? wretch, what hast thou done?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Damned art thou, Faustus, damned; despair and die!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Says, “Faustus! come! thine hour is almost come!”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Faustus now will come to do the right.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b> gives him a dagger.</i>
								</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ah, stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I see an angel hovers o’er thy head,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, with a vial full of precious grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Offers to pour the same into thy soul:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then call for mercy, and avoid despair.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ah, my sweet friend, I feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy words to comfort my distressed soul!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>I go, sweet Faustus, but with heavy cheer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fearing the ruin of thy hopeless soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Accursed Faustus, where is mercy now?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I do repent; and yet I do despair:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What shall I do to shun the snares of death?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For disobedience to my sovereign lord;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Revolt, or I’ll in piecemeal tear thy flesh.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Sweet Mephistopheles, entreat thy lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To pardon my unjust presumption.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with my blood again I will confirm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My former vow I made to Lucifer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Do it, then, quickly, with unfeigned heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lest greater danger do attend thy drift.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> stabs his arm and writes on a paper with his blood.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a></i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Torment, sweet friend, that base and crooked age,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With greatest torments that our hell affords.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>His faith is great: I cannot touch his soul;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But what I may afflict his body with</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will attempt, which is but little worth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>One thing, good servant, let me crave of thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To glut the longing of my heart’s desire⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I might have unto my paramour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That heavenly Helen, which I saw of late,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose sweet embracings may extinguish clean</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Faustus, this or what else thou shalt desire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall be performed in twinkling of an eye.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <em>Helen</em>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Was this the face that launched a thousand ships<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her.</i>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her lips suck forth my soul; see, where it flies!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here will I dwell, for Heaven is in these lips,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all is dross that is not Helena.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will be Paris, and for love of thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Instead of Troy, shall Wertenberg be sacked:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I will combat with weak Menelaus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wear thy colours on my plumed crest:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then return to Helen for a kiss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, thou art fairer than the evening air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he appeared to hapless Semele:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More lovely than the monarch of the sky</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In wanton Arethusa’s azured arms:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And none but thou shalt be my paramour!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
