<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-6" epub:type="z3998:scene z3998:verse">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
			</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>When I behold the heavens, then I repent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And curse thee, wicked Mephistopheles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because thou hast deprived me of those joys.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Why, Faustus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thinkest thou Heaven is such a glorious thing?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I tell thee ’tis not half so fair as thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or any man that breathes on earth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>How prov’st thou that?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>’Twas made for man, therefore is man more excellent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>If it were made for man, ’twas made for me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will renounce this magic and repent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Faustus, repent; yet God will pity thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Thou art a spirit; God cannot pity thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Who buzzeth in mine ears I am a spirit?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ay, God will pity me if I repent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>My heart’s so hardened I cannot repent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But fearful echoes thunder in mine ears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Faustus, thou art damned!” Then swords, and knives,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Poison, gun, halters, and envenomed steel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are laid before me to despatch myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And long ere this I should have slain myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had not sweet pleasure conquered deep despair.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have not I made blind Homer sing to me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Alexander’s love and Oenon’s death?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hath not he that built the walls of Thebes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With ravishing sound of his melodious harp,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Made music with my Mephistopheles?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why should I die then, or basely despair?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am resolved; Faustus shall ne’er repent⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, Mephistopheles, let us dispute again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And argue of divine astrology.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell me, are there many heavens above the moon?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are all celestial bodies but one globe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is the substance of this centric earth?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>As are the elements, such are the spheres</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mutually folded in each other’s orb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, Faustus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All jointly move upon one axletree</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose terminine is termed the world’s wide pole;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Feigned, but are erring stars.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>But tell me, have they all one motion, both <i xml:lang="la">situ et tempore</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>All jointly move from east to west in twenty-four hours upon the poles of the world; but differ in their motion upon the poles of the zodiac.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Tush!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These slender trifles Wagner can decide;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath Mephistopheles no greater skill?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who knows not the double motion of the planets?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The first is finished in a natural day;</span>
							</p>
							<p>The second thus; as Saturn in thirty years; Jupiter in twelve; Mars in four; the Sun, Venus, and Mercury in a year; the moon in twenty eight days. Tush, these are freshmen’s suppositions. But tell me, hath every sphere a dominion or <i xml:lang="la">intelligentia</i>?</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ay.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>How many heavens, or spheres, are there?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>Nine: the seven planets, the firmament, and the empyreal heaven.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Well, resolve me in this question: why have we not conjunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipses, all at one time, but in some years we have more, in some less?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span><i xml:lang="la">Per inoequalem motum respectu totius</i>.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Well, I am answered. Tell me who made the world?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>I will not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Sweet Mephistopheles, tell me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Move me not, for I will not tell thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me anything?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>Ay, that is not against our kingdom; but this is. Think thou on hell, Faustus, for thou art damned.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Think, Faustus, upon God that made the world.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Remember this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis thou hast damned distressed Faustus’ soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is’t not too late?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b></i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Too late.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Never too late, if Faustus can repent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>If thou repent, devils shall tear thee in pieces.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Ah, Christ, my Saviour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seek to save distressed Faustus’ soul!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>, <em>Belzebub</em>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There’s none but I have interest in the same.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>O, who art thou that look’st so terrible?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>I am Lucifer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And this is my companion-prince in hell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>O Faustus! they are come to fetch away thy soul!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>We come to tell thee thou dost injure us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou talk’st of Christ contrary to thy promise;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou should’st not think of God: think of the Devil.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Nor will I henceforth: pardon me in this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Faustus vows never to look to Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never to name God, or to pray to him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To burn his Scriptures, slay his ministers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make my spirits pull his churches down.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>Do so, and we will highly gratify thee. Faustus, we are come from hell to show thee some pastime: sit down, and thou shalt see all the Seven Deadly Sins appear in their proper shapes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>That sight will be as pleasing unto me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As Paradise was to Adam, the first day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of his creation.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>Talk not of Paradise nor creation; but mark this show: talk of the Devil, and nothing else: come away!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Seven Deadly Sins</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>Now, Faustus, examine them of their several names and dispositions.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>What art thou⁠—the first?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pride</td>
						<td>I am Pride. I disdain to have any parents. I am like to Ovid’s flea:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> I can creep into every corner of a wench; sometimes, like a periwig, I sit upon her brow; or like a fan of feathers, I kiss her lips; indeed I do⁠—what do I not? But, fie, what a scent is here! I’ll not speak another word, except the ground were perfumed, and covered with cloth of arras.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>What art thou⁠—the second?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Covetousness</td>
						<td>I am Covetousness, begotten of an old churl in an old leathern bag; and might I have my wish I would desire that this house and all the people in it were turned to gold, that I might lock you up in my good chest: O, my sweet gold!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>What art thou⁠—the third?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wrath</td>
						<td>I am Wrath. I had neither father nor mother: I leapt out of a lion’s mouth when I was scarce half an hour old; and ever since I have run up and down the world with this case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> of rapiers, wounding myself when I had nobody to fight withal. I was born in hell; and look to it, for some of you shall be my father.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>What art thou⁠—the fourth?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Envy</td>
						<td>I am Envy, begotten of a chimney sweeper and an oyster-wife. I cannot read, and therefore wish all books were burnt. I am lean with seeing others eat. O that there would come a famine through all the world, that all might die, and I live alone! then thou should’st see how fat I would be. But must thou sit and I stand! Come down, with a vengeance!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Away, envious rascal! What art thou⁠—the fifth?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gluttony</td>
						<td>Who I, sir? I am Gluttony. My parents are all dead, and the devil a penny they have left me, but a bare pension, and that is thirty meals a day and ten bevers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a>⁠—a small trifle to suffice nature. O, I come of a royal parentage! my grandfather was a Gammon of Bacon, my grandmother a Hogshead of Claret-wine; my godfathers were these, Peter Pickle-herring and Martin Martlemas-beef;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> O, but my godmother, she was a jolly gentlewoman, and well-beloved in every good town and city; her name was Mistress Margery March-beer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a> Now, Faustus, thou hast heard all my progeny, wilt thou bid me to supper?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>No, I’ll see thee hanged: thou wilt eat up all my victuals.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gluttony</td>
						<td>Then the Devil choke thee!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Choke thyself, glutton! What art thou⁠—the sixth?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sloth</td>
						<td>I am Sloth. I was begotten on a sunny bank, where I have lain ever since; and you have done me great injury to bring me from thence: let me be carried thither again by Gluttony and Lechery. I’ll not speak another word for a king’s ransom.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>What are you, Mistress Minx, the seventh and last?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lechery</td>
						<td>Who I, sir? I am one that loves an inch of raw mutton better than an ell of fried stock-fish; and the first letter of my name begins with L.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>Away to hell, to hell! Now, Faustus, how dost thou like this?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sins</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>O, this feeds my soul!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>Tut, Faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>O might I see hell, and return again, How happy were I then!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Thou shalt; I will send for thee at midnight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In meantime take this book; peruse it throughly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou shalt turn thyself into what shape thou wilt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Great thanks, mighty Lucifer! This will I keep as chary as my life.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>Farewell, Faustus, and think on the Devil.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Farewell, great Lucifer.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b> and <em>Belzebub</em>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<span class="i6">Come, Mephistopheles.</span>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
