<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-7" epub:type="z3998:scene z3998:verse">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
			</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Learned Faustus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To know the secrets of astronomy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Graven in the book of Jove’s high firmament,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did mount himself to scale Olympus’ top,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Being seated in a chariot burning bright,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons’ necks.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He now is gone to prove cosmography,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To see the Pope and manner of his court,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And take some part of holy Peter’s feast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That to this day is highly solemnised.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Having now, my good Mephistopheles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passed with delight the stately town of Trier,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Environed round with airy mountain-tops,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With walls of flint, and deep-entrenched lakes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not to be won by any conquering prince;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Paris next, coasting the realm of France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We saw the river Maine fall into Rhine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then up to Naples, rich Campania,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The streets straight forth, and paved with finest brick,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quarter the town in four equivalents:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There saw we learned Maro’s golden tomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The way he cut, an English mile in length,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thorough a rock of stone, in one night’s space;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> of which a sumptuous temple stands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That threats the stars with her aspiring top.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But tell me now what resting-place is this?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast thou, as erst I did command,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Conducted me within the walls of Rome?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>Faustus, I have; and because we will not be unprovided, have taken up his Holiness’ privy-chamber for our use.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>I hope his Holiness will bid us welcome.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Tut, ’tis no matter, man, we’ll be bold with his good cheer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now, my Faustus, that thou may’st perceive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What Rome containeth to delight thee with,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know that this city stands upon seven hills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That underprop the groundwork of the same:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just through the midst runs flowing Tiber’s stream,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With winding banks that cut it in two parts:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Over the which four stately bridges lean,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That make safe passage to each part of Rome:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the bridge called Ponte Angelo</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Erected is a castle passing strong,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within whose walls such store of ordnance are,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And double<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> cannons framed of carved brass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As match the days within one complete year;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Besides the gates and high pyramides,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which Julius Caesar brought from Africa.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Now by the kingdoms of infernal rule,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Styx, of Acheron, and the fiery lake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I do long to see the monuments</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And situation of bright-splendent Rome:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come therefore, let’s away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Nay, Faustus, stay; I know you’d fain see the Pope,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And take some part of holy Peter’s feast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where thou shalt see a troop of baldpate friars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose <i xml:lang="la">summum bonum</i> is in belly-cheer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Well, I’m content to compass then some sport,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by their folly make us merriment.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then charm me, Mephistopheles, that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May be invisible, to do what I please</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unseen of any whilst I stay in Rome.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b> charms him.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>So, Faustus; now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do what thou wilt, thou shalt not be discerned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sound a sonnet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal of Lorrain</b> to the banquet, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Friars</b> attending.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
						<td>My Lord of Lorrain, wilt please you draw near?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Fall to, and the devil choke you an you spare!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
						<td>How now! Who’s that which spake?⁠—Friars, look about.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Friar</td>
						<td>Here’s nobody, if it like your Holiness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
						<td>My lord, here is a dainty dish was sent me from the Bishop Milan.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>I thank you, sir. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the dish.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
						<td>How now! Who’s that which snatched the meat from me? Will no man look? My lord, this dish was sent me from the Cardinal of Florence.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>You say true; I’ll ha’t. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the dish.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
						<td>What, again! My lord, I’ll drink to your grace.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>I’ll pledge your grace. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the cup.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal of Lorrain</td>
						<td>My lord, it may be some ghost, newly crept out of purgatory, come to beg a pardon of your Holiness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
						<td>It may be so. Friars, prepare a dirge to lay the fury of this ghost. Once again, my lord, fall to. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> crosses himself.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>What, are you crossing of yourself? Well, use that trick no more I would advise you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> crosses himself again.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>Well, there’s the second time. Aware the third; I give you fair warning.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> crosses himself again, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> hits him a box of the ear; and they all run away.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>Come on, Mephistopheles; what shall we do?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</td>
						<td>Nay, I know not. We shall be cursed with bell, book, and candle.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How! bell, book, and candle⁠—candle, book, and bell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forward and backward to curse Faustus to hell!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Anon you shall hear a hog grunt, a calf bleat, and an ass bray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because it is Saint Peter’s holiday.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Friars</b> to sing the Dirge.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Friar</td>
						<td>Come, brethren, let’s about our business with good devotion.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They sing.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr epub:type="z3998:song">
						<td/>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Cursed be he that stole away his Holiness’ meat from the table! <i xml:lang="la">Maledicat Dominus!</i></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cursed be he that struck his Holiness a blow on the face! <i xml:lang="la">Maledicat Dominus!</i></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cursed be he that took Friar Sandelo a blow on the pate! <i xml:lang="la">Maledicat Dominus!</i></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cursed be he that disturbeth our holy dirge! <i xml:lang="la">Maledicat Dominus!</i></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cursed be he that took away his Holiness’ wine! <i xml:lang="la">Maledicat Dominus Et omnes sancti! Amen!</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> beat the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Friars</b>, and fling fireworks among them: and so exeunt.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
