<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-1" epub:type="z3998:scene z3998:verse">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h2>
			<table>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b> discovered<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> in his study.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Having commenced, be a divine in show,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet level at the end of every art,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And live and die in Aristotle’s works.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sweet Analytics, ’tis thou hast ravished me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i xml:lang="la">Bene disserere est finis logices</i>.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is to dispute well logic’s chiefest end?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Affords this art no greater miracle?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then read no more; thou hast attained that end;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A greater subject fitteth Faustus’ wit:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bid <i xml:lang="la">on cai me on</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> farewell; Galen come,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seeing, <i xml:lang="la">Ubi desinit Philosophus, ibi incipit Medicus</i>;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be a physician, Faustus, heap up gold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And be eternised for some wondrous cure.</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i xml:lang="la">Summum bonum medicinae sanitas</i>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The end of physic is our body’s health.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why, Faustus, hast thou not attained that end?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is not thy common talk found Aphorisms?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are not thy bills<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> hung up as monuments,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereby whole cities have escaped the plague,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And thousand desperate maladies been eased?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet art thou still but Faustus and a man.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Couldst thou make men to live eternally,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or, being dead, raise them to life again,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then this profession were to be esteemed.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Physic, farewell.⁠—Where is Justinian?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<i xml:lang="la">Si una eademque res legatur duobus, alter rem, alter valorem rei, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>A pretty case of paltry legacies!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<i xml:lang="la">Ex hoereditare filium non potest pater nisi, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>Such is the subject of the Institute,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And universal Body of the Law.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This study fits a mercenary drudge,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who aims at nothing but external trash;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too servile and illiberal for me.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When all is done, divinity is best;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Jerome’s Bible, Faustus, view it well.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p><i xml:lang="la">Stipendium peccati mors est</i>. Ha! <i xml:lang="la">Stipendium, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i></p>
						<p>
							<span>The reward of sin is death. That’s hard.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<i xml:lang="la">Si peccasse negamus fallimur et nulla est in nobis veritas;</i>
						</p>
						<p>If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and there’s no truth in us. Why then, belike we must sin, and so consequently die.</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, we must die an everlasting death.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> </span>
							<br/>
							<span>What will be shall be? Divinity, adieu!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These metaphysics of magicians</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And necromantic books are heavenly:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lines, circles, scenes, letters, and characters;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, what a world of profit and delight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of power, of honour, of omnipotence</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is promised to the studious artisan!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All things that move between the quiet poles</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall be at my command: emperors and kings</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are but obeyed in their several provinces,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor can they raise the wind or rend the clouds;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But his dominion that exceeds in this</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A sound magician is a mighty god:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here, Faustus, tire thy brains to gain a deity.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wagner!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</b>.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span class="i6">Commend me to my dearest friends,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The German Valdes and Cornelius;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Request them earnestly to visit me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I will, sir.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Their conference will be a greater help to me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than all my labours, plod I ne’er so fast.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b>.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, Faustus! lay that damned book aside,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And gaze not on it lest it tempt thy soul,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And heap God’s heavy wrath upon thy head.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Read, read the Scriptures: that is blasphemy.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Go forward, Faustus, in that famous art,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherein all Nature’s treasure is contained:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be thou on earth as Jove is in the sky,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lord and commander of these elements.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</b>.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How am I glutted with conceit of this!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Resolve me of all ambiguities,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Perform what desperate enterprise I will?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them fly to India for gold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ransack the ocean for orient pearl,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And search all corners of the newfound world</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For pleasant fruits and princely delicates;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them read me strange philosophy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And tell the secrets of all foreign kings;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them wall all Germany with brass,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make swift Rhine circle fair Wertenberg;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them fill the public schools with silk,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherewith the students shall be bravely clad;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll levy soldiers with the coin they bring,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And reign sole king of all the provinces;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp’s bridge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll make my servile spirits to invent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cornelius</b>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, German Valdes, and Cornelius,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make me blest with your sage conference.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Know that your words have won me at the last</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To practice magic and concealed arts:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet not your words only, but mine own fantasy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That will receive no object; for my head</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But ruminates on necromantic skill.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Philosophy is odious and obscure,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Both law and physic are for petty wits;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Divinity is basest of the three,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Tis magic, magic, that hath ravished me.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I, that have with concise syllogisms</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Gravelled the pastors of the German church,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And made the flowering pride of Wertenberg</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Swarm to my problems, as the infernal spirits</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On sweet Musaeus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> when he came to hell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Will be as cunning as Agrippa<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> was,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose shadow made all Europe honour him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall make all nations to canonise us.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So shall the spirits of every element</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be always serviceable to us three;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like lions shall they guard us when we please;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like Almain rutters<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> with their horsemen’s staves</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or Lapland giants,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> trotting by our sides;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than have the white breasts of the queen of love:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From Venice shall they drag huge argosies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And from America the golden fleece</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That yearly stuffs old Philip’s treasury;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If learned Faustus will be resolute.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Valdes, as resolute am I in this</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As thou to live; therefore object it not.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cornelius</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>The miracles that magic will perform</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Will make thee vow to study nothing else.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He that is grounded in astrology,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Enriched with tongues, well seen in minerals,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hath all the principles magic doth require.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowned,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And more frequented for this mystery</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than heretofore the Delphian Oracle.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The spirits tell me they can dry the sea,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, all the wealth that our forefathers hid</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within the massy entrails of the earth;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nothing, Cornelius! O this cheers my soul!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come, show me some demonstrations magical,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I may conjure in some lusty grove,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And have these joys in full possession.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then haste thee to some solitary grove,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bear wise Bacon’s and Albertus’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> works,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Hebrew Psalter, and New Testament;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And whatsoever else is requisite</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We will inform thee ere our conference cease.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cornelius</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Valdes, first let him know the words of art;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then, all other ceremonies learned,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus may try his cunning by himself.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>First I’ll instruct thee in the rudiments,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then come and dine with me, and after meat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We’ll canvass every quiddity thereof;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For ere I sleep, I’ll try what I can do:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This night I’ll conjure, tho’ I die therefore.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
