<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-8" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
			</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>When Faustus had with pleasure ta’en the view</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of rarest things, and royal courts of kings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He stayed his course, and so returned home;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where such as bear his absence but with grief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I mean his friends, and near’st companions,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did gratulate his safety with kind words,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in their conference of what befell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Touching his journey through the world and air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They put forth questions of Astrology,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which Faustus answered with such learned skill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As they admired and wondered at his wit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now is his fame spread forth in every land;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Amongst the rest the Emperor is one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Carolus the Fifth, at whose palace now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Faustus is feasted ’mongst his noblemen.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What there he did in trial of his art,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I leave untold⁠—your eyes shall see performed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin the Ostler</b>, with a book in his hand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>O, this is admirable! here I ha’ stolen one of Doctor Faustus’s conjuring books, and, i’faith I mean to search some circles for my own use. Now will I make all the maidens in our parish dance at my pleasure, stark naked before me; and so by that means I shall see more than e’er I felt or saw yet.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</b>, calling <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
						<td>Robin, prithee, come away; there’s a gentleman tarries to have his horse, and he would have his things rubbed and made clean: he keeps such a chafing with my mistress about it; and she has sent me to look thee out; prithee, come away.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>Keep out, keep out, or else you are blown up; you are dismembered, Ralph: keep out, for I am about a roaring piece of work.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
						<td>Come, what doest thou with that same book? Thou canst not read?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>Yes, my master and mistress shall find that I can read, he for his forehead, she for her private study; she’s born to bear with me, or else my art fails.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
						<td>Why, Robin, what book is that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>What book! why, the most intolerable book for conjuring that e’er was invented by any brimstone devil.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
						<td>Can’st thou conjure with it?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>I can do all these things easily with it; first, I can make thee drunk with ippocras<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> at any tabern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> in Europe for nothing; that’s one of my conjuring works.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
						<td>Our Master Parson says that’s nothing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>True, Ralph; and more, Ralph, if thou hast any mind to Nan Spit, our kitchenmaid, then turn her and wind her to thy own use as often as thou wilt, and at midnight.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
						<td>O brave Robin! shall I have Nan Spit, and to mine own use? On that condition I’ll feed thy devil with horsebread<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> as long as he lives, of free cost.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
						<td>No more, sweet Ralph: let’s go and make clean our boots, which lie foul upon our hands, and then to our conjuring in the Devil’s name.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
