<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Scene X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-10" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
			</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b>, and a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</b>, with <em>Attendants</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>Master Doctor Faustus, I have heard strange report of thy knowledge in the black art, how that none in my empire nor in the whole world can compare with thee for the rare effects of magic: they say thou hast a familiar spirit, by whom thou canst accomplish what thou list. This therefore is my request, that thou let me see some proof of thy skill, that mine eyes may be witnesses to confirm what mine ears have heard reported: and here I swear to thee by the honour of mine imperial crown, that, whatever thou doest, thou shalt be no ways prejudiced or endamaged.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>I’faith, he looks much like a conjurer. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>My gracious sovereign, though I must confess myself far inferior to the report men have published, and nothing answerable to the honour of your imperial majesty, yet for that love and duty binds me thereunto, I am content to do whatsoever your majesty shall command me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Then, Doctor Faustus, mark what I shall say.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I was sometime solitary set</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within my closet, sundry thoughts arose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>About the honour of mine ancestors,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How they had won by prowess such exploits,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Got such riches, subdued so many kingdoms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As we that do succeed, or they that shall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hereafter possess our throne, shall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(I fear me) ne’er attain to that degree</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of high renown and great authority:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Amongst which kings is Alexander the Great,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Chief spectacle of the world’s preeminence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright shining of whose glorious acts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lightens the world with his reflecting beams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when I hear but motion made of him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It grieves my soul I never saw the man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If therefore thou by cunning of thine art,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Canst raise this man from hollow vaults below,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where lies entombed this famous conqueror,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bring with him his beauteous paramour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They used to wear during their time of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt both satisfy my just desire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And give me cause to praise thee whilst I live.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>My gracious lord, I am ready to accomplish your request so far forth as by art, and power of my Spirit, I am able to perform.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>I’faith that’s just nothing at all. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>But, if it like your grace, it is not in my ability to present before your eyes the true substantial bodies of those two deceased princes, which long since are consumed to dust.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>Ay, marry, Master Doctor, now there’s a sign of grace in you, when you will confess the truth. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>But such spirits as can lively resemble Alexander and his paramour shall appear before your grace in that manner that they both lived in, in their most flourishing estate; which I doubt not shall sufficiently content your imperial majesty.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>Go to, Master Doctor, let me see them presently.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>Do you hear, Master Doctor? You bring Alexander and his paramour before the Emperor!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>How then, sir?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>I’faith, that’s as true as Diana turned me to a stag.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>No, sir; but, when Actaeon died, he left the horns for you. Mephistopheles, begone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>Nay, an you go to conjuring, I’ll begone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>I’ll meet with you anon for interrupting me so. Here they are, my gracious lord.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b> with <em>Spirits</em> in the shapes of Alexander and his Paramour.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>Master Doctor, I heard this lady while she lived had a wart or mole in her neck: how shall I know whether it be so or no?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Your highness may boldly go and see.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>Sure, these are no spirits, but the true substantial bodies of those two deceased princes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <em>Spirits</em>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>Will’t please your highness now to send for the knight that was so pleasant with me here of late?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>One of you call him forth!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <em>Attendant</em>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</b> with a pair of horns on his head.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>How now, sir knight! why, I had thought thou had’st been a bachelor, but now I see thou hast a wife, that not only gives thee horns, but makes thee wear them. Feel on thy head.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Thou damned wretch and execrable dog,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bred in the concave of some monstrous rock,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How darest thou thus abuse a gentleman?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Villain, I say, undo what thou hast done!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>O, not so fast, sir; there’s no haste; but, good, are you remembered how you crossed me in my conference with the Emperor? I think I have met with you for it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>Good Master Doctor, at my entreaty release him: he hath done penance sufficient.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
						<td>My gracious lord, not so much for the injury he offered me here in your presence, as to delight you with some mirth, hath Faustus worthily requited this injurious knight: which being all I desire, I am content to release him of his horns: and, sir knight, hereafter speak well of scholars. Mephistopheles, transform him straight. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistopheles</b> removes the horns.</i> Now, my good lord, having done my duty I humbly take my leave.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<span>Farewell, Master Doctor; yet, ere you go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Expect from me a bounteous reward.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
