<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Play</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="the-play" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dr. Faustus</h2>
			<table>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Not marching now in fields of Thrasymene,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where Mars did mate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> the Carthaginians;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor sporting in the dalliance of love,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In courts of kings where state is overturn’d;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Intends our Muse to vaunt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> her<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> heavenly verse:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Only this, gentlemen⁠—we must perform</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The form of Faustus’ fortunes, good or bad:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To patient judgments we appeal our plaud,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And speak for Faustus in his infancy.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now is he born, his parents base of stock,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In Germany, within a town call’d Rhodes:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of riper years, to Wertenberg he went,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> his kinsmen chiefly brought him up.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So soon he profits in divinity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The fruitful plot of scholarism grac’d,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That shortly he was grac’d with doctor’s name,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Excelling all whose sweet delight disputes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In heavenly matters of theology;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till swoln with cunning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> of a self-conceit,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His waxen wings did mount above his reach,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, melting, heavens conspir’d his overthrow;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For, falling to a devilish exercise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And glutted now<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> with learning’s golden gifts,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He surfeits upon cursed necromancy;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nothing so sweet as magic is to him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And this the man that in his study sits.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Faustus discovered in his study.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Having commenc’d, be a divine in shew,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet level at the end of every art,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And live and die in Aristotle’s works.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sweet Analytics, ’tis thou<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> hast ravish’d me!</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i xml:lang="la">Bene disserere est finis logices</i>.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is, to dispute well, logic’s chiefest end?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Affords this art no greater miracle?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then read no more; thou hast attain’d that<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> end:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A greater subject fitteth Faustus’ wit:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bid Economy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> farewell, and<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> Galen come,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seeing, <i xml:lang="la">Ubi desinit philosophus, ibi incipit medicus</i>:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be a physician, Faustus; heap up gold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And be eterniz’d for some wondrous cure:</span>
							<br/>
							<span"><i xml:lang="la">Summum bonum medicinae sanitas</i>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The end of physic is our body’s health.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why, Faustus, hast thou not attain’d that end?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is not thy common talk found aphorisms?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereby whole cities have escap’d the plague,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And thousand desperate maladies been eas’d?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet art thou still but Faustus, and a man.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Couldst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> thou make men<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> to live eternally,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or, being dead, raise them to life again,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then this profession were to be esteem’d.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Physic, farewell! Where is Justinian?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span"><i xml:lang="la">Si una eademque res legatur<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> duobus, alter rem</i>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i xml:lang="la">alter valorem rei, &c.</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>A pretty case of paltry legacies!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span></i>Exhoereditare filium non potest pater, nisi, &c.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such is the subject of the institute,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And universal body of the law:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>This<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> study fits a mercenary drudge,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who aims at nothing but external trash;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too servile<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> and illiberal for me.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When all is done, divinity is best:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Jerome’s Bible, Faustus; view it well.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span xml:lang="la">Stipendium peccati mors est.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ha!</span>
							<br/>
							<span xml:lang="la">Stipendium, &c.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The reward of sin is death: that’s hard.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span xml:lang="la">Si peccasse negamus, fallimur, et nulla est in nobis veritas;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>there’s no truth in us. Why, then, belike we must sin, and so</span>
							<br/>
							<span>consequently die:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, we must die an everlasting death.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>What will be, shall be? Divinity, adieu!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These metaphysics of magicians,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And necromantic books are heavenly;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lines, circles, scenes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> letters, and characters;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, what a world of profit and delight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of power, of honour, of omnipotence,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is promis’d to the studious artizan!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All things that move between the quiet poles</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall be at my command: emperors and kings</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are but obeyed in their several provinces,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor can they raise the wind, or rend the clouds;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But his dominion that exceeds in this,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A sound magician is a mighty god:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here, Faustus, tire<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> thy brains to gain a deity.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Wagner.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Wagner, commend me to my dearest friends,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The German Valdes and Cornelius;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Request them earnestly to visit me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I will, sir.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Their conference will be a greater help to me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than all my labours, plod I ne’er so fast.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, Faustus, lay that damned book aside,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And heap God’s heavy wrath upon thy head!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Read, read the Scriptures:⁠—that is blasphemy.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Go forward, Faustus, in that famous art</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherein all Nature’s treasure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> is contain’d:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be thou on earth as Jove<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> is in the sky,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lord and commander of these elements.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Angels.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How am I glutted with conceit of this!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Resolve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> me of all ambiguities,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Perform what desperate enterprise I will?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them fly to India for gold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ransack the ocean for orient pearl,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And search all corners of the new-found world</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For pleasant fruits and princely delicates;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them read me strange philosophy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And tell the secrets of all foreign kings;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them wall all Germany with brass,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make swift Rhine circle fair Wertenberg;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll have them fill the public schools with silk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherewith the students shall be bravely clad;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll levy soldiers with the coin they bring,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And reign sole king of all the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> provinces;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp’s bridge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll make my servile spirits to invent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Valdes and Cornelius.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, German Valdes, and Cornelius,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make me blest with your sage conference.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Know that your words have won me at the last</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To practice magic and concealed arts:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet not your words only,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> but mine own fantasy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That will receive no object; for my head</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But ruminates on necromantic skill.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Philosophy is odious and obscure;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Both law and physic are for petty wits;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Divinity is basest of the three,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> ’Tis magic, magic, that hath ravish’d me.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I, that have with concise syllogisms<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> Gravell’d the pastors of the German church,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And made the flowering pride of Wertenberg</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Swarm to my problems, as the infernal spirits</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On sweet Musaeus when he came to hell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Will be as cunning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> as Agrippa<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> was,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose shadow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> made all Europe honour him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall make all nations to canonize us.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So shall the spirits<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> of every element</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be always serviceable to us three;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like lions shall they guard us when we please;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like Almain rutters<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> with their horsemen’s staves,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or Lapland giants, trotting by our sides;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than have the<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> white breasts of the queen of love:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> Venice shall they drag huge argosies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And from America the golden fleece</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That yearly stuffs old Philip’s treasury;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If learned Faustus will be resolute.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Valdes, as resolute am I in this</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As thou to live: therefore object it not.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cornelius</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>The miracles that magic will perform</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Will make thee vow to study nothing else.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He that is grounded in astrology,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Enrich’d with tongues, well seen in<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> minerals,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hath all the principles magic doth require:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowm’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>And more frequented for this mystery</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than heretofore the Delphian oracle.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The spirits tell me they can dry the sea,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, all the wealth that our forefathers hid</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within the massy entrails of the earth:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nothing, Cornelius. O, this cheers my soul!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come, shew me some demonstrations magical,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I may conjure in some lusty grove,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And have these joys in full possession.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then haste thee to some solitary grove,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bear wise Bacon’s and Albertus’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a> works,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Hebrew Psalter, and New Testament;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And whatsoever else is requisite</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We will inform thee ere our conference cease.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cornelius</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Valdes, first let him know the words of art;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then, all other ceremonies learn’d,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus may try his cunning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> by himself.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valdes</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>First I’ll instruct thee in the rudiments,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then come and dine with me, and, after meat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We’ll canvass every quiddity thereof;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For, ere I sleep, I’ll try what I can do:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This night I’ll conjure, though I die therefore.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two Scholars.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I wonder what’s become of Faustus, that was wont</span>
							<br/>
							<span>to make our schools ring with sic probo.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>That shall we know, for see, here comes his boy.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Wagner.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How now, sirrah! where’s thy master?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>God in heaven knows.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, dost not thou know?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yes, I know; but that follows not.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Go to, sirrah! leave your jesting, and tell us</span>
							<br/>
							<span>where he is.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>That follows not necessary by force of argument, that you,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>being licentiates, should stand upon:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> therefore acknowledge</span>
							<br/>
							<span>your error, and be attentive.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, didst thou not say thou knewest?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Have you any witness on’t?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yes, sirrah, I heard you.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ask my fellow if I be a thief.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, you will not tell us?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yes, sir, I will tell you: yet, if you were not dunces,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>you would never ask me such a question; for is not he corpus</span>
							<br/>
							<span>naturale? and is not that mobile? then wherefore should you</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ask me such a question? But that I am by nature phlegmatic,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>slow to wrath, and prone to lechery (to love, I would say),</span>
							<br/>
							<span>it were not for you to come within forty foot of the place</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of execution, although I do not doubt to see you both hanged</span>
							<br/>
							<span>the next sessions. Thus having triumphed over you, I will set</span>
							<br/>
							<span>my countenance like a precisian, and begin to speak thus:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Truly, my dear brethren, my master is within at dinner,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>with Valdes and Cornelius, as this wine, if it could speak,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>would<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> inform your worships: and so, the Lord bless you,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>preserve you, and keep you, my dear brethren, my dear brethren!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, then, I fear he is fallen into that damned art</span>
							<br/>
							<span>for which they two are infamous through the world.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Were he a stranger, and not allied to me, yet should</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I grieve for him. But, come, let us go and inform the Rector,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and see if he by his grave counsel can reclaim him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, but I fear me nothing can reclaim him!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yet let us try what we can do.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Faustus to conjure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now that the gloomy shadow of the earth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Longing to view Orion’s drizzling look,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Leaps from th’ antartic world unto the sky,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And dims the welkin with her pitchy breath,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus, begin thine incantations,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And try if devils will obey thy hest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seeing thou hast pray’d and sacrific’d to them.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within this circle is Jehovah’s name,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Forward and backward anagrammatiz’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Th’ abbreviated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> names of holy saints,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Figures of every adjunct to the heavens,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And characters of signs and erring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> stars,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By which the spirits are enforc’d to rise:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then fear not, Faustus, but be resolute,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And try the uttermost magic can perform.⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sint mihi dei Acherontis propitii! Valeat numen triplex Jehovoe!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ignei, aerii, aquatani spiritus, salvete! Orientis princeps</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Belzebub, inferni ardentis monarcha, et Demogorgon, propitiamus</span>
							<br/>
							<span>vos, ut appareat et surgat Mephistophilis, quod tumeraris:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>per Jehovam, Gehennam, et consecratam aquam quam nunc spargo,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>signumque crucis quod nunc facio, et per vota nostra, ipse nunc</span>
							<br/>
							<span>surgat nobis dicatus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> Mephistophilis!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I charge thee to return, and change thy shape;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou art too ugly to attend on me:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Go, and return an old Franciscan friar;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That holy shape becomes a devil best.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I see there’s virtue in my heavenly words:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who would not be proficient in this art?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How pliant is this Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Full of obedience and humility!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such is the force of magic and my spells:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No, Faustus, thou art conjuror laureat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That canst command great Mephistophilis:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Quin regis Mephistophilis fratris imagine.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis like a Franciscan friar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, Faustus, what wouldst thou have me do?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To do whatever Faustus shall command,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or the ocean to overwhelm the world.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am a servant to great Lucifer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And may not follow thee without his leave:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No more than he commands must we perform.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Did not he charge thee to appear to me?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No, I came hither<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> of mine own accord.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Did not my conjuring speeches raise thee? speak.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>That was the cause, but yet per accidens;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>For, when we hear one rack the name of God,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Abjure the Scriptures and his Saviour Christ,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We fly, in hope to get his glorious soul;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor will we come, unless he use such means</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereby he is in danger to be damn’d.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Therefore the shortest cut for conjuring</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is stoutly to abjure the Trinity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And pray devoutly to the prince of hell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>So Faustus hath</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Already done; and holds this principle,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There is no chief but only Belzebub;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This word “damnation” terrifies not him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For he confounds hell in Elysium:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His ghost be with the old philosophers!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, leaving these vain trifles of men’s souls,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tell me what is that Lucifer thy lord?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Arch-regent and commander of all spirits.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Was not that Lucifer an angel once?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yes, Faustus, and most dearly lov’d of God.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How comes it, then, that he is prince of devils?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, by aspiring pride and insolence;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For which God threw him from the face of heaven.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>And what are you that live with Lucifer?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Unhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Conspir’d against our God with Lucifer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And are for ever damn’d with Lucifer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Where are you damn’d?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>In hell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How comes it, then, that thou art out of hell?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Think’st thou that I, who saw the face of God,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Am not tormented with ten thousand hells,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In being depriv’d of everlasting bliss?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which strike a terror to my fainting soul!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, is great Mephistophilis so passionate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For being deprived of the joys of heaven?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Go bear these<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> tidings to great Lucifer:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seeing Faustus hath incurr’d eternal death</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By desperate thoughts against Jove’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> deity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Say, he surrenders up to him his soul,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So he will spare him four and twenty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> years,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Letting him live in all voluptuousness;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Having thee ever to attend on me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To give me whatsoever I shall ask,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To tell me whatsoever I demand,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To slay mine enemies, and aid my friends,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And always be obedient to my will.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Go and return to mighty Lucifer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And meet me in my study at midnight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then resolve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a> me of thy master’s mind.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I will, Faustus.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Had I as many souls as there be stars,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’d give them all for Mephistophilis.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By him I’ll be great emperor of the world,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make a bridge thorough<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> the moving air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To pass the ocean with a band of men;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll join the hills that bind the Afric shore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make that country<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> continent to Spain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And both contributory to my crown:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Emperor shall not live but by my leave,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor any potentate of Germany.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now that I have obtain’d what I desir’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll live in speculation of this art,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till Mephistophilis return again.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Wagner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> and Clown.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sirrah boy, come hither.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How, boy! swowns, boy! I hope you have seen many boys</span>
							<br/>
							<span>with such pickadevaunts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> as I have: boy, quotha!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tell me, sirrah, hast thou any comings in?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, and goings out too; you may see else.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Alas, poor slave! see how poverty jesteth in his nakedness!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>the villain is bare and out of service, and so hungry, that I know</span>
							<br/>
							<span>he would give his soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>though it were blood-raw.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How! my soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton, though</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’twere blood-raw! not so, good friend: by’r lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> I had need</span>
							<br/>
							<span>have it well roasted, and good sauce to it, if I pay so dear.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, wilt thou serve me, and I’ll make thee go like</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Qui mihi discipulus?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How, in verse?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No, sirrah; in beaten silk and staves-acre.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How, how, knaves-acre! ay, I thought that was all the land</span>
							<br/>
							<span>his father left him. Do you hear? I would be sorry to rob you of</span>
							<br/>
							<span>your living.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sirrah, I say in staves-acre.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Oho, oho, staves-acre! why, then, belike, if I were your</span>
							<br/>
							<span>man, I should be full of vermin.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>So thou shalt, whether thou beest with me or no. But,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>sirrah, leave your jesting, and bind yourself presently unto me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>for seven years, or I’ll turn all the lice about thee into</span>
							<br/>
							<span>familiars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> and they shall tear thee in pieces.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Do you hear, sir? you may save that labour; they are too</span>
							<br/>
							<span>familiar with me already: swowns, they are as bold with my flesh</span>
							<br/>
							<span>as if they had paid for their<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> meat and drink.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, do you hear, sirrah? hold, take these guilders.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives money.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Gridirons! what be they?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, French crowns.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Mass, but for the name of French crowns, a man were as good</span>
							<br/>
							<span>have as many English counters. And what should I do with these?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, now, sirrah, thou art at an hour’s warning, whensoever</span>
							<br/>
							<span>or wheresoever the devil shall fetch thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No, no; here, take your gridirons again.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Truly, I’ll none of them.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Truly, but you shall.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Bear witness I gave them him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Bear witness I give them you again.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, I will cause two devils presently to fetch thee</span>
							<br/>
							<span>away.⁠—Baliol and Belcher!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Let your Baliol and your Belcher come here, and I’ll</span>
							<br/>
							<span>knock them, they were never so knocked since they were devils:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>say I should kill one of them, what would folks say? “Do ye see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>yonder tall fellow in the round slop?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> he has killed the devil.”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So I should be called Kill-devil all the parish over.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two Devils; and the Clown runs up and down crying.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Baliol and Belcher⁠—spirits, away!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Devils.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, are they gone? a vengeance on them! they have vile<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>long nails. There was a he-devil and a she-devil: I’ll tell you</span>
							<br/>
							<span>how you shall know them; all he-devils has horns, and all</span>
							<br/>
							<span>she-devils has clifts and cloven feet.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, sirrah, follow me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, do you hear? if I should serve you, would you teach</span>
							<br/>
							<span>me to raise up Banios and Belcheos?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I will teach thee to turn thyself to any thing, to a dog,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>or a cat, or a mouse, or a rat, or any thing.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How! a Christian fellow to a dog, or a cat, a mouse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>or a rat! no, no, sir; if you turn me into any thing, let it be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>in the likeness of a little pretty frisking flea, that I may be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>here and there and every where: O, I’ll tickle the pretty wenches’</span>
							<br/>
							<span>plackets! I’ll be amongst them, i’faith.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, sirrah, come.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, do you hear, Wagner?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How!⁠—Baliol and Belcher!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O Lord! I pray, sir, let Banio and Belcher go sleep.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Villain, call me Master Wagner, and let thy left eye be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>diametarily fixed upon my right heel, with quasi vestigiis</span>
							<br/>
							<span>nostris<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a> insistere.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clown</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>God forgive me, he speaks Dutch fustian. Well, I’ll follow</span>
							<br/>
							<span>him; I’ll serve him, that’s flat.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Faustus discovered in his study.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, Faustus, must</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou needs be damn’d, and canst thou not be sav’d:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What boots it, then, to think of God or heaven?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Away with such vain fancies, and despair;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Despair in God, and trust in Belzebub:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now go not backward; no, Faustus, be resolute:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why waver’st thou? O, something soundeth in mine ears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“Abjure this magic, turn to God again!”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, and Faustus will turn to God again.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To God? he loves thee not;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The god thou serv’st is thine own appetite,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherein is fix’d the love of Belzebub:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To him I’ll build an altar and a church,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sweet Faustus, leave that execrable art.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Contrition, prayer, repentance⁠—what of them?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, they are means to bring thee unto heaven!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That make men foolish that do trust them most.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sweet Faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No, Faustus; think of honour and of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> wealth.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Angels.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Of wealth!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why, the signiory of Embden shall be mine.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When Mephistophilis shall stand by me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What god can hurt thee, Faustus? thou art safe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cast no more doubts.⁠—Come, Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer;⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is’t not midnight?⁠—come, Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Veni, veni, Mephistophile!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now tell me<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a> what says Lucifer, thy lord?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he lives,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>So he will buy my service with his soul.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, Faustus, thou must bequeath it solemnly,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And write a deed of gift with thine own blood;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For that security craves great Lucifer.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If thou deny it, I will back to hell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Stay, Mephistophilis, and tell me, what good will my soul</span>
							<br/>
							<span>do thy lord?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Enlarge his kingdom.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Is that the reason why<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> he tempts us thus?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a> have you any pain that torture<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> others!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>As great as have the human souls of men.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, tell me, Faustus, shall I have thy soul?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I will be thy slave, and wait on thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, Mephistophilis, I give it thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then, Faustus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> stab thine arm courageously,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bind thy soul, that at some certain day</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Great Lucifer may claim it as his own;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then be thou as great as Lucifer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Stabbing his arm Lo, Mephistophilis, for love of thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I cut mine arm, and with my proper blood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Assure my soul to be great Lucifer’s,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Chief lord and regent of perpetual night!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>View here the blood that trickles from mine arm,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And let it be propitious for my wish.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, Faustus, thou must</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Write it in manner of a deed of gift.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, so I will Writes. But, Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My blood congeals, and I can write no more.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’ll fetch thee fire to dissolve it straight.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What might the staying of my blood portend?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is it unwilling I should write this bill?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why streams it not, that I may write afresh?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus Gives TO Thee His Soul: ah, there it stay’d!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why shouldst thou not? is not thy soul shine own?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then write again, Faustus Gives TO Thee His Soul.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis with a chafer of coals.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Here’s fire; come, Faustus, set it on.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>So, now the blood begins to clear again;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now will I make an end immediately.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, what will not I do to obtain his soul?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Consummatum est; this bill is ended,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Faustus hath bequeath’d his soul to Lucifer.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But what is this inscription<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> on mine arm?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Homo, fuge: whither should I fly?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If unto God, he’ll throw me<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> down to hell.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My senses are deceiv’d; here’s nothing writ:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I see it plain; here in this place is writ,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Homo, fuge: yet shall not Faustus fly.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’ll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside, and then exit.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis with Devils, who give crowns and rich apparel to Faustus, dance, and then depart.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Speak, Mephistophilis, what means this show?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nothing, Faustus, but to delight thy mind withal,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And to shew thee what magic can perform.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But may I raise up spirits when I please?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, Faustus, and do greater things than these.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then there’s enough for a thousand souls.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here, Mephistophilis, receive this scroll,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A deed of gift of body and of soul:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But yet conditionally that thou perform</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All articles prescrib’d between us both.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, I swear by hell and Lucifer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To effect all promises between us made!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then hear me read them. <i> epub:type=”z3998:stage-direction”>Reads.</i> ON These Conditions</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Following. First, That Faustus May BE A Spirit IN Form And</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Substance. Secondly, That Mephistophilis Shall BE His Servant,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And AT His Command. Thirdly, That Mephistophilis Shall DO For Him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Bring Him Whatsoever HE Desires.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> Fourthly, That HE Shall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>BE IN His Chamber OR House Invisible. Lastly, That HE Shall Appear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>TO The Said John Faustus, AT All Times, IN What Form OR Shape</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Soever HE Please. I, John Faustus, OF Wertenberg, Doctor, BY</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These Presents, DO Give Both Body And Soul TO Lucifer Prince OF</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The East, And His Minister Mephistophilis; And Furthermore Grant</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unto Them, That,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> Twenty-Four Years Being Expired, The Articles</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Above-Written Inviolate, Full Power TO Fetch OR Carry The Said</span>
							<br/>
							<span>John Faustus, Body And Soul, Flesh, Blood, OR Goods, Into Their</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Habitation Wheresoever. BY ME, John Faustus.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Speak, Faustus, do you deliver this as your deed?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, take it, and the devil give thee good on’t!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, Faustus, ask what thou wilt.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>First will I question with thee about hell.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tell me, where is the place that men call hell?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Under the heavens.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, but whereabout?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Within the bowels of these<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a> elements,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where we are tortur’d and remain for ever:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscrib’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In one self place; for where we are is hell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And where hell is, there<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> must we ever be:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, to conclude, when all the world dissolves,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And every creature shall be purified,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All places shall be hell that are<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> not heaven.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, I think hell’s a fable.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, think’st thou, then, that Faustus shall be damn’d?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, of necessity, for here’s the scroll</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherein thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, and body too: but what of that?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Think’st thou that Faustus is so fond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a> to imagine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That, after this life, there is any pain?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tush, these are trifles and mere old wives’ tales.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, Faustus, I am an instance to prove the contrary,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For I am damn’d, and am now in hell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How! now in hell!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nay, an this be hell, I’ll willingly be damn’d here:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What! walking, disputing, &c.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, leaving off this, let me have a wife,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>The fairest maid in Germany;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For I am wanton and lascivious,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And cannot live without a wife.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How! a wife!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I prithee, Faustus, talk not of a wife.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, sweet Mephistophilis, fetch me one, for I will have</span>
							<br/>
							<span>one.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, thou wilt have one? Sit there till I come: I’ll</span>
							<br/>
							<span>fetch thee a wife in the devil’s name.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis with a Devil drest like a Woman, with fire-works.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tell me,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> Faustus, how dost thou like thy wife?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>A plague on her for a hot whore!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tut, Faustus,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Marriage is but a ceremonial toy;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If thou lovest me, think no<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a> more of it.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll cull thee out the fairest courtezans,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bring them every morning to thy bed:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She whom thine eye shall like, thy heart shall have,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be she as chaste as was Penelope,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As wise as Saba,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a> or as beautiful</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As was bright Lucifer before his fall.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hold, take this book, peruse it thoroughly:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives book.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The iterating<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> of these lines brings gold;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The framing of this circle on the ground</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Brings whirlwinds, tempests, thunder, and lightning;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And men in armour shall appear to thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ready to execute what thou desir’st.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Thanks, Mephistophilis: yet fain would I have a book</span>
							<br/>
							<span>wherein I might behold all spells and incantations, that I</span>
							<br/>
							<span>might raise up spirits when I please.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Here they are in this book.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns to them.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now would I have a book where I might see all characters</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and planets of the heavens, that I might know their motions and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>dispositions.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Here they are too.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns to them.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, let me have one book more⁠—and then I have done⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>wherein I might see all plants, herbs, and trees, that grow upon</span>
							<br/>
							<span>the earth.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Here they be.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, thou art deceived.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tut, I warrant thee.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns to them.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>When I behold the heavens, then I repent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And curse thee, wicked Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Because thou hast depriv’d me of those joys.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, Faustus,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thinkest thou heaven is such a glorious thing?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I tell thee, ’tis not half so fair as thou,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or any man that breathes on earth.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How prov’st thou that?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>’Twas made for man, therefore is man more excellent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>If it were made for man, ’twas made for me:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I will renounce this magic and repent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, repent; yet God will pity thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Thou art a spirit; God cannot pity thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Who buzzeth in mine ears I am a spirit?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay, God will pity me, if I repent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Angels.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My heart’s so harden’d, I cannot repent:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But fearful echoes thunder in mine ears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“Faustus, thou art damn’d!” then swords, and knives,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Poison, guns, halters, and envenom’d steel</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are laid before me to despatch myself;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And long ere this I should have slain myself,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had not sweet pleasure conquer’d deep despair.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Have not I made blind Homer sing to me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Alexander’s love and Oenon’s death?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And hath not he, that built the walls of Thebes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With ravishing sound of his melodious harp,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Made music with my Mephistophilis?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why should I die, then, or basely despair?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I am resolv’d; Faustus shall ne’er repent.⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come, Mephistophilis, let us dispute again,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And argue of divine astrology.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tell me, are there many heavens above the moon</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are all celestial bodies but one globe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As is the substance of this centric earth?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>As are the elements, such are the spheres,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mutually folded in each other’s orb,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, Faustus,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All jointly move upon one axletree,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose terminine is term’d the world’s wide pole;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Feign’d, but are erring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a> stars.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, tell me, have they all one motion, both situ et</span>
							<br/>
							<span>tempore?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>All jointly move from east to west in twenty-four hours</span>
							<br/>
							<span>upon the poles of the world; but differ in their motion upon</span>
							<br/>
							<span>the poles of the zodiac.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tush,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These slender trifles Wagner can decide:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hath Mephistophilis no greater skill?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who knows not the double motion of the planets?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The first is finish’d in a natural day;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The second thus; as Saturn in thirty years; Jupiter in twelve;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mars in four; the Sun, Venus, and Mercury in a year; the Moon in</span>
							<br/>
							<span>twenty-eight days. Tush, these are freshmen’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> suppositions.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, tell me, hath every sphere a dominion or intelligentia?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How many heavens or spheres are there?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nine; the seven planets, the firmament, and the empyreal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>heaven.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, resolve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a> me in this question; why have we not</span>
							<br/>
							<span>conjunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipses, all at one time,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>but in some years we have more, in some less?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Per inoequalem motum respectu totius.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, I am answered. Tell me who made the world?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I will not.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sweet Mephistophilis, tell me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Move me not, for I will not tell thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me any thing?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, that is not against our kingdom; but this is. Think</span>
							<br/>
							<span>thou on hell, Faustus, for thou art damned.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Think, Faustus, upon God that made the world.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Remember this.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Tis thou hast damn’d distressed Faustus’ soul.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is’t not too late?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</b></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Too late.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Never too late, if Faustus can repent.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Evil Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>If thou repent, devils shall tear thee in pieces.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Good Angel</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Angels.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, Christ, my Saviour,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seek to save<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> distressed Faustus’ soul!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Lucifer, Belzebub, and Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There’s none but I have interest in the same.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, who art thou that look’st so terrible?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am Lucifer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And this is my companion-prince in hell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, Faustus, they are come to fetch away thy soul!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>We come to tell thee thou dost injure us;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou talk’st of Christ, contrary to thy promise:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou shouldst not think of God: think of the devil,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And of his dam too.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nor will I henceforth: pardon me in this,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Faustus vows never to look to heaven,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Never to name God, or to pray to him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To burn his Scriptures, slay his ministers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make my spirits pull his churches down.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Do so, and we will highly gratify thee. Faustus, we are</span>
							<br/>
							<span>come from hell to shew thee some pastime: sit down, and thou</span>
							<br/>
							<span>shalt see all the Seven Deadly Sins appear in their proper shapes.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>That sight will be as pleasing unto me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As Paradise was to Adam, the first day</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of his creation.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Talk not of Paradise nor creation; but mark this show:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>talk of the devil, and nothing else.⁠—Come away!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the Seven Deadly Sins.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, Faustus, examine them of their several names and dispositions.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What art thou, the first?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pride</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am Pride. I disdain to have any parents. I am like to</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ovid’s flea; I can creep into every corner of a wench; sometimes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>like a perriwig, I sit upon her brow; or, like a fan of feathers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I kiss her lips; indeed, I do⁠—what do I not? But, fie, what a</span>
							<br/>
							<span>scent is here! I’ll not speak another word, except the ground</span>
							<br/>
							<span>were perfumed, and covered with cloth of arras.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What art thou, the second?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Covetousness</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am Covetousness, begotten of an old churl, in an</span>
							<br/>
							<span>old leathern bag: and, might I have my wish, I would desire that</span>
							<br/>
							<span>this house and all the people in it were turned to gold, that I</span>
							<br/>
							<span>might lock you up in my good chest: O, my sweet gold!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What art thou, the third?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wrath</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am Wrath. I had neither father nor mother: I leapt out</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of a lion’s mouth when I was scarce half-an-hour old; and ever</span>
							<br/>
							<span>since I have run up and down the world with this case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>of rapiers, wounding myself when I had nobody to fight withal.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I was born in hell; and look to it, for some of you shall be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>my father.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What art thou, the fourth?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Envy</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am Envy, begotten of a chimney-sweeper and an oyster-wife.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I cannot read, and therefore wish all books were burnt. I am lean</span>
							<br/>
							<span>with seeing others eat. O, that there would come a famine through</span>
							<br/>
							<span>all the world, that all might die, and I live alone! then thou</span>
							<br/>
							<span>shouldst see how fat I would be. But must thou sit, and I stand?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>come down, with a vengeance!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Away, envious rascal!⁠—What art thou, the fifth?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gluttony</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Who I, sir? I am Gluttony. My parents are all dead,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and the devil a penny they have left me, but a bare pension, and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>that is thirty meals a-day and ten bevers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a>⁠—a small trifle</span>
							<br/>
							<span>to suffice nature. O, I come of a royal parentage! my grandfather</span>
							<br/>
							<span>was a Gammon of Bacon, my grandmother a Hogshead of Claret-wine;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>my godfathers were these, Peter Pickle-herring and Martin</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Martlemas-beef; O, but my godmother, she was a jolly gentlewoman,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and well-beloved in every good town and city; her name was Mistress</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Margery March-beer. Now, Faustus, thou hast heard all my progeny;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>wilt thou bid me to supper?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No, I’ll see thee hanged: thou wilt eat up all my victuals.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gluttony</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then the devil choke thee!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Choke thyself, glutton!⁠—What art thou, the sixth?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sloth</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am Sloth. I was begotten on a sunny bank, where I have</span>
							<br/>
							<span>lain ever since; and you have done me great injury to bring me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>from thence: let me be carried thither again by Gluttony and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lechery. I’ll not speak another word for a king’s ransom.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What are you, Mistress Minx, the seventh and last?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lechery</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Who I, sir? I am one that loves an inch of raw mutton</span>
							<br/>
							<span>better than an ell of fried stock-fish; and the first letter</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of my name begins with L.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Away, to hell, to hell!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt the Sins.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, Faustus, how dost thou like this?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, this feeds my soul!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tut, Faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, might I see hell, and return again,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How happy were I then!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Thou shalt; I will send for thee at midnight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>In meantime take this book; peruse it throughly,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And thou shalt turn thyself into what shape thou wilt.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Great thanks, mighty Lucifer!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This will I keep as chary as my life.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Farewell, Faustus, and think on the devil.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Farewell, great Lucifer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Lucifer and Belzebub.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, Mephistophilis.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Chorus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Learned Faustus,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To know the secrets of astronomy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Graven in the book of Jove’s high firmament,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Did mount himself to scale Olympus’ top,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Being seated in a chariot burning bright,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons’ necks.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He now is gone to prove cosmography,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To see the Pope and manner of his court,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And take some part of holy Peter’s feast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That to this day is highly solemniz’d.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Faustus and Mephistophilis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Having now, my good Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pass’d with delight the stately town of Trier,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Environ’d round with airy mountain-tops,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With walls of flint, and deep-entrenched lakes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not to be won by any conquering prince;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From Paris next,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> coasting the realm of France,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We saw the river Maine fall into Rhine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then up to Naples, rich Campania,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The streets straight forth, and pav’d with finest brick,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Quarter the town in four equivalents:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There saw we learned Maro’s golden tomb,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The way he cut,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a> an English mile in length,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thorough a rock of stone, in one night’s space;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In one of which a sumptuous temple stands,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>That threats the stars with her aspiring top.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But tell me now what resting-place is this?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hast thou, as erst I did command,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Conducted me within the walls of Rome?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, I have; and, because we will not be unprovided,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I have taken up his Holiness’ privy-chamber for our use.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I hope his Holiness will bid us welcome.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tut, ’tis no matter; man; we’ll be bold with his good cheer.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And now, my Faustus, that thou mayst perceive</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What Rome containeth to delight thee with,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Know that this city stands upon seven hills</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That underprop the groundwork of the same:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Just through the midst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> runs flowing Tiber’s stream</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With winding banks that cut it in two parts;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Over the which four stately bridges lean,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That make safe passage to each part of Rome:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Upon the bridge call’d Ponte<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a> Angelo</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Erected is a castle passing strong,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within whose walls such store of ordnance are,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And double cannons fram’d of carved brass,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As match the days within one complete year;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Besides the gates, and high pyramides,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which Julius Caesar brought from Africa.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, by the kingdoms of infernal rule,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Styx, of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> Acheron, and the fiery lake</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I do long to see the monuments</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And situation of bright-splendent Rome:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come, therefore, let’s away.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, Faustus, stay: I know you’d fain see the Pope,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And take some part of holy Peter’s feast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where thou shalt see a troop of bald-pate friars,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose summum bonum is in belly-cheer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, I’m content to compass then some sport,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And by their folly make us merriment.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then charm me, that I<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>May be invisible, to do what I please,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unseen of any whilst I stay in Rome.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mephistophilis charms him.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>So, Faustus; now</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Do what thou wilt, thou shalt not be discern’d.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sound a Sonnet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a> Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinal of Lorrain</b> to the banquet, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Friars</b> attending.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My Lord of Lorrain, will’t please you draw near?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Fall to, and the devil choke you, an you spare!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How now! who’s that which spake?⁠—Friars, look about.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Friar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Here’s nobody, if it like your Holiness.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My lord, here is a dainty dish was sent me from the Bishop</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of Milan.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I thank you, sir.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the dish.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How now! who’s that which snatched the meat from me? will</span>
							<br/>
							<span>no man look?⁠—My lord, this dish was sent me from the Cardinal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of Florence.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>You say true; I’ll ha’t.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the dish.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, again!⁠—My lord, I’ll drink to your grace.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’ll pledge your grace.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatches the cup.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">C. OF Lor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My lord, it may be some ghost, newly crept out of</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Purgatory, come to beg a pardon of your Holiness.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>It may be so.⁠—Friars, prepare a dirge to lay the fury</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of this ghost.⁠—Once again, my lord, fall to.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> crosses himself.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, are you crossing of yourself?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Well, use that trick no more, I would advise you.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> crosses himself again.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Well, there’s the second time. Aware the third;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I give you fair warning.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pope</b> crosses himself again, and Faustus hits him a box of the ear; and they all run away.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come on, Mephistophilis; what shall we do?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, I know not: we shall be cursed with bell, book,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and candle.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How! bell, book, and candle⁠—candle, book, and bell⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Anon you shall hear a hog grunt, a calf bleat, and an ass bray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Because it is Saint Peter’s holiday.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter all the Friars to sing the Dirge.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Friar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come, brethren, let’s about our business with good devotion.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They sing.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cursed BE HE That Stole Away His Holiness’ Meat From The</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Table! maledicat Dominus!</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Cursed BE HE That Struck His Holiness A Blow ON The Face!</span>
							<br/>
							<span> maledicat Dominus!</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Cursed BE HE That Took Friar Sandelo A Blow ON The Pate!</span>
							<br/>
							<span> maledicat Dominus!</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Cursed BE HE That Disturbeth Our Holy Dirge! maledicat</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Dominus!</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Cursed BE HE That Took Away His Holiness’ Wine! maledicat</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Dominus? ‘?’ sic</span>
							<br/>
							<span> Et omnes Sancti! Amen!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mephistophilis and Faustus beat the Friars, and fling fire-works among them; and so exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Chorus.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>When Faustus had with pleasure ta’en the view</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of rarest things, and royal courts of kings,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He stay’d his course, and so returned home;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where such as bear his absence but with grief,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I mean his friends and near’st companions,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Did gratulate his safety with kind words,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And in their conference of what befell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Touching his journey through the world and air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They put forth questions of astrology,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which Faustus answer’d with such learned skill</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As they admir’d and wonder’d at his wit.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now is his fame spread forth in every land:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Amongst the rest the Emperor is one,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Carolus the Fifth, at whose palace now</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus is feasted ‘mongst his noblemen.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What there he did, in trial of his art,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I leave untold; your eyes shall see’t perform’d.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Robin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> the Ostler, with a book in his hand.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, this is admirable! here I ha’ stolen one of Doctor</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus’ conjuring-books, and, i’faith, I mean to search some</span>
							<br/>
							<span>circles for my own use. Now will I make all the maidens in our</span>
							<br/>
							<span>parish dance at my pleasure, stark naked, before me; and so</span>
							<br/>
							<span>by that means I shall see more than e’er I felt or saw yet.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Ralph, calling Robin.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Robin, prithee, come away; there’s a gentleman tarries</span>
							<br/>
							<span>to have his horse, and he would have his things rubbed and made</span>
							<br/>
							<span>clean: he keeps such a chafing with my mistress about it; and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>she has sent me to look thee out; prithee, come away.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Keep out, keep out, or else you are blown up, you are</span>
							<br/>
							<span>dismembered, Ralph: keep out, for I am about a roaring piece</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of work.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, what doest thou with that same book? thou canst</span>
							<br/>
							<span>not read?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yes, my master and mistress shall find that I can read,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>he for his forehead, she for her private study; she’s born to</span>
							<br/>
							<span>bear with me, or else my art fails.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, Robin, what book is that?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What book! why, the most intolerable book for conjuring</span>
							<br/>
							<span>that e’er was invented by any brimstone devil.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Canst thou conjure with it?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I can do all these things easily with it; first, I can</span>
							<br/>
							<span>make thee drunk with ippocras<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a> at any tabern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a> in Europe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>for nothing; that’s one of my conjuring works.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Our Master Parson says that’s nothing.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>True, Ralph: and more, Ralph, if thou hast any mind to</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nan Spit, our kitchen-maid, then turn her and wind her to thy own</span>
							<br/>
							<span>use, as often as thou wilt, and at midnight.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, brave, Robin! shall I have Nan Spit, and to mine own</span>
							<br/>
							<span>use? On that condition I’ll feed thy devil with horse-bread as</span>
							<br/>
							<span>long as he lives, of free cost.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No more, sweet Ralph: let’s go and make clean our boots,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>which lie foul upon our hands, and then to our conjuring in the</span>
							<br/>
							<span>devil’s name.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Robin and Ralph<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> with a silver goblet.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, Ralph: did not I tell thee, we were for ever made</span>
							<br/>
							<span>by this Doctor Faustus’ book? ecce, signum! here’s a simple</span>
							<br/>
							<span>purchase<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> for horse-keepers: our horses shall eat no hay as</span>
							<br/>
							<span>long as this lasts.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, Robin, here comes the Vintner.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Hush! I’ll gull him supernaturally.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</b></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Drawer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a> I hope all is paid; God be with you!⁠—Come, Ralph.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Soft, sir; a word with you. I must yet have a goblet paid</span>
							<br/>
							<span>from you, ere you go.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I a goblet, Ralph, I a goblet!⁠—I scorn you; and you are</span>
							<br/>
							<span>but a, &c. I a goblet! search me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I mean so, sir, with your favour.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Searches Robin.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How say you now?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I must say somewhat to your fellow.⁠—You, sir!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Me, sir! me, sir! search your fill.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</b>searches him.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now, sir, you may be ashamed to burden honest men with a matter</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of truth.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, tone<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> of you hath this goblet about you.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>You lie, drawer, ’tis afore me Aside.⁠—Sirrah you, I’ll</span>
							<br/>
							<span>teach you to impeach honest men;⁠—stand by;⁠—I’ll scour you for</span>
							<br/>
							<span>a goblet;⁠—stand aside you had best, I charge you in the name of</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Belzebub.⁠—Look to the goblet, Ralph Aside to Ralph.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What mean you, sirrah?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’ll tell you what I mean. Reads from a book Sanctobulorum</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Periphrasticon⁠—nay, I’ll tickle you, Vintner.⁠—Look to the goblet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ralph Aside to Ralph.⁠—Reads Polypragmos Belseborams framanto</span>
							<br/>
							<span>pacostiphos tostu, Mephistophilis, &c.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Mephistophilis, sets squibs at their backs, and then exit. They run about.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, nomine Domini! what meanest thou, Robin? thou hast no</span>
							<br/>
							<span>goblet.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Peccatum peccatorum!⁠—Here’s thy goblet, good Vintner.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives the goblet to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vintner</b>, who exit.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Misericordia pro nobis! what shall I do? Good devil, forgive</span>
							<br/>
							<span>me now, and I’ll never rob thy library more.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Monarch of Hell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a> under whose black survey</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Great potentates do kneel with awful fear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Upon whose altars thousand souls do lie,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How am I vexed with these villains’ charms?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From Constantinople am I hither come,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How, from Constantinople! you have had a great journey:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>will you take sixpence in your purse to pay for your supper, and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>be gone?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, villains, for your presumption, I transform thee</span>
							<br/>
							<span>into an ape, and thee into a dog; and so be gone!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How, into an ape! that’s brave: I’ll have fine sport with</span>
							<br/>
							<span>the boys; I’ll get nuts and apples enow.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ralph</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>And I must be a dog.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Robin</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’faith, thy head will never be out of the pottage-pot.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</b>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b>, and a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Master Doctor Faustus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a> I have heard strange report</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of thy knowledge in the black art, how that none in my empire</span>
							<br/>
							<span>nor in the whole world can compare with thee for the rare effects</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of magic: they say thou hast a familiar spirit, by whom thou canst</span>
							<br/>
							<span>accomplish what thou list. This, therefore, is my request, that</span>
							<br/>
							<span>thou let me see some proof of thy skill, that mine eyes may be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>witnesses to confirm what mine ears have heard reported: and here</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I swear to thee, by the honour of mine imperial crown, that,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>whatever thou doest, thou shalt be no ways prejudiced or endamaged.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’faith, he looks much like a conjurer.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My gracious sovereign, though I must confess myself far</span>
							<br/>
							<span>inferior to the report men have published, and nothing answerable</span>
							<br/>
							<span>to the honour of your imperial majesty, yet, for that love and duty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>binds me thereunto, I am content to do whatsoever your majesty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>shall command me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Then, Doctor Faustus, mark what I shall say.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As I was sometime solitary set</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within my closet, sundry thoughts arose</span>
							<br/>
							<span>About the honour of mine ancestors,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How they had won<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a> by prowess such exploits,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Got such riches, subdu’d so many kingdoms,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As we that do succeed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a> or they that shall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hereafter possess our throne, shall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>(I fear me) ne’er attain to that degree</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of high renown and great authority:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Amongst which kings is Alexander the Great,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Chief spectacle of the world’s pre-eminence,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The bright<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref-135" epub:type="noteref">135</a> shining of whose glorious acts</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lightens the world with his reflecting beams,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As when I hear but motion made of him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It grieves my soul I never saw the man:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If, therefore, thou, by cunning of thine art,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Canst raise this man from hollow vaults below,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where lies entomb’d this famous conqueror,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bring with him his beauteous paramour,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They us’d to wear during their time of life,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou shalt both satisfy my just desire,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And give me cause to praise thee whilst I live.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My gracious lord, I am ready to accomplish your request,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>so far forth as by art and power of my spirit I am able to perform.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’faith, that’s just nothing at all.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But, if it like your grace, it is not in my ability<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-136" id="noteref-136" epub:type="noteref">136</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>to present before your eyes the true substantial bodies of those</span>
							<br/>
							<span>two deceased princes, which long since are consumed to dust.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, marry, Master Doctor, now there’s a sign of grace in</span>
							<br/>
							<span>you, when you will confess the truth.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But such spirits as can lively resemble Alexander and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>his paramour shall appear before your grace, in that manner that</span>
							<br/>
							<span>they both<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-137" id="noteref-137" epub:type="noteref">137</a> lived in, in their most flourishing estate; which</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I doubt not shall sufficiently content your imperial majesty.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Go to, Master Doctor; let me see them presently.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Do you hear, Master Doctor? you bring Alexander and his</span>
							<br/>
							<span>paramour before the Emperor!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How then, sir?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’faith, that’s as true as Diana turned me to a stag.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No, sir; but, when Actaeon died, he left the horns for</span>
							<br/>
							<span>you.⁠—Mephistophilis, be gone.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, an you go to conjuring, I’ll be gone.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’ll meet with you anon for interrupting me so.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>—Here they are, my gracious lord.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis with Spirits in the shapes of Alexander and his Paramour.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Master Doctor, I heard this lady, while she lived, had a</span>
							<br/>
							<span>wart or mole in her neck: how shall I know whether it be so or no?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Your highness may boldly go and see.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sure, these are no spirits, but the true substantial</span>
							<br/>
							<span>bodies of those two deceased princes.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Spirits.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Wilt please your highness now to send for the knight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>that was so pleasant with me here of late?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>One of you call him forth.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Attendant.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</b> with a pair of horns on his head.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How now, sir knight! why, I had thought thou hadst been a bachelor,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>but now I see thou hast a wife, that not only gives thee horns,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>but makes thee wear them. Feel on thy head.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Thou damned wretch and execrable dog,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bred in the concave of some monstrous rock,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How dar’st thou thus abuse a gentleman?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Villain, I say, undo what thou hast done!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, not so fast, sir! there’s no haste: but, good, are</span>
							<br/>
							<span>you remembered how you crossed me in my conference with the</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Emperor? I think I have met with you for it.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Good Master Doctor, at my entreaty release him: he hath</span>
							<br/>
							<span>done penance sufficient.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My gracious lord, not so much for the injury he offered</span>
							<br/>
							<span>me here in your presence, as to delight you with some mirth, hath</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus worthily requited this injurious knight; which being all</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I desire, I am content to release him of his horns:⁠—and,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>sir knight, hereafter speak well of scholars.⁠—Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>transform him straight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a> Mephistophilis removes the horns.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>—Now, my good lord, having done my duty, I humbly take my leave.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Farewell, Master Doctor: yet, ere you go,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Expect from me a bounteous reward.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emperor</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Now, Mephistophilis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a> the restless course</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That time doth run with calm and silent foot,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shortening my days and thread of vital life,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Calls for the payment of my latest years:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Therefore, sweet Mephistophilis, let us</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Make haste to Wertenberg.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, will you go on horse-back or on foot?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Nay, till I’m past this fair and pleasant green,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll walk on foot.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a Horse-Courser.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I have been all this day seeking one Master Fustian:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>mass, see where he is!⁠—God save you, Master Doctor!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, horse-courser! you are well met.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Do you hear, sir? I have brought you forty dollars</span>
							<br/>
							<span>for your horse.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I cannot sell him so: if thou likest him for fifty, take</span>
							<br/>
							<span>him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Alas, sir, I have no more!⁠—I pray you, speak for</span>
							<br/>
							<span>me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I pray you, let him have him: he is an honest fellow,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and he has a great charge, neither wife nor child.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, come, give me your money Horse-Courser gives</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus the money: my boy will deliver him to you. But I must</span>
							<br/>
							<span>tell you one thing before you have him; ride him not into the</span>
							<br/>
							<span>water, at any hand.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, sir, will he not drink of all waters?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, yes, he will drink of all waters; but ride him not</span>
							<br/>
							<span>into the water: ride him over hedge or ditch, or where thou wilt,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>but not into the water.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Well, sir.⁠—Now am I made man for ever: I’ll not</span>
							<br/>
							<span>leave my horse for forty:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a> if he had but the quality of</span>
							<br/>
							<span>hey-ding-ding, hey-ding-ding, I’d make a brave living on him:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>he has a buttock as slick as an eel Aside.⁠—Well, God b’wi’ye,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>sir: your boy will deliver him me: but, hark you, sir; if my horse</span>
							<br/>
							<span>be sick or ill at ease, if I bring his water to you, you’ll tell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>me what it is?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Away, you villain! what, dost think I am a horse-doctor?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Horse-Courser.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What art thou, Faustus, but a man condemn’d to die?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thy fatal time doth draw to final end;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Despair doth drive distrust into<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> my thoughts:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Confound these passions with a quiet sleep:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tush, Christ did call the thief upon the Cross;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then rest thee, Faustus, quiet in conceit.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sleeps in his chair.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Horse-Courser, all wet, crying.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Alas, alas! Doctor Fustian, quoth a? mass, Doctor</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lopus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a> was never such a doctor: has given me a purgation, has</span>
							<br/>
							<span>purged me of forty dollars; I shall never see them more. But yet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>like an ass as I was, I would not be ruled by him, for he bade me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I should ride him into no water: now I, thinking my horse had had</span>
							<br/>
							<span>some rare quality that he would not have had me know of,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a> I,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>like a venturous youth, rid him into the deep pond at the town’s</span>
							<br/>
							<span>end. I was no sooner in the middle of the pond, but my horse</span>
							<br/>
							<span>vanished away, and I sat upon a bottle of hay, never so near</span>
							<br/>
							<span>drowning in my life. But I’ll seek out my doctor, and have my</span>
							<br/>
							<span>forty dollars again, or I’ll make it the dearest horse!⁠—O,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>yonder is his snipper-snapper.⁠—Do you hear? you, hey-pass,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>where’s your master?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, sir, what would you? you cannot speak with him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But I will speak with him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, he’s fast asleep: come some other time.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I’ll speak with him now, or I’ll break his</span>
							<br/>
							<span>glass-windows about his ears.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I tell thee, he has not slept this eight nights.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>An he have not slept this eight weeks, I’ll</span>
							<br/>
							<span>speak with him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>See, where he is, fast asleep.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, this is he.⁠—God save you, Master Doctor,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Master Doctor, Master Doctor Fustian! forty dollars, forty dollars</span>
							<br/>
							<span>for a bottle of hay!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why, thou seest he hears thee not.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>So-ho, ho! so-ho, ho! Hollows in his ear. No,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>will you not wake? I’ll make you wake ere I go. Pulls Faustus</span>
							<br/>
							<span>by the leg, and pulls it away. Alas, I am undone! what shall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I do?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, my leg, my leg!⁠—Help, Mephistophilis! call the</span>
							<br/>
							<span>officers.⁠—My leg, my leg!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, villain, to the constable.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O Lord, sir, let me go, and I’ll give you forty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>dollars more!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Where be they?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Horse-Courser</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I have none about me: come to my ostry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>and I’ll give them you.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Be gone quickly.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Horse-Courser runs away.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What, is he gone? farewell he! Faustus has his leg again,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and the Horse-courser, I take it, a bottle of hay for his labour:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>well, this trick shall cost him forty dollars more.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Wagner.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>How now, Wagner! what’s the news with thee?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sir, the Duke of Vanholt doth earnestly entreat your</span>
							<br/>
							<span>company.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>The Duke of Vanholt! an honourable gentleman, to whom</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I must be no niggard of my cunning.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a>⁠—Come, Mephistophilis,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>let’s away to him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Vanholt</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</b>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Believe me, Master Doctor, this merriment hath much pleased</span>
							<br/>
							<span>me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My gracious lord, I am glad it contents you so well.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>—But it may be, madam, you take no delight in this. I have heard</span>
							<br/>
							<span>that great-bellied women do long for some dainties or other: what</span>
							<br/>
							<span>is it, madam? tell me, and you shall have it.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Thanks, good Master Doctor: and, for I see your courteous</span>
							<br/>
							<span>intent to pleasure me, I will not hide from you the thing my heart</span>
							<br/>
							<span>desires; and, were it now summer, as it is January and the dead</span>
							<br/>
							<span>time of the winter, I would desire no better meat than a dish</span>
							<br/>
							<span>of ripe grapes.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Alas, madam, that’s nothing!⁠—Mephistophilis, be gone.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Exit Mephistophilis. Were it a greater thing than this, so it</span>
							<br/>
							<span>would content you, you should have it.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Mephistophilis with grapes.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Here they be, madam: wilt please you taste on them?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Believe me, Master Doctor, this makes me wonder above the</span>
							<br/>
							<span>rest, that being in the dead time of winter and in the month of</span>
							<br/>
							<span>January, how you should come by these grapes.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>If it like your grace, the year is divided into two</span>
							<br/>
							<span>circles over the whole world, that, when it is here winter with</span>
							<br/>
							<span>us, in the contrary circle it is summer with them, as in India,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Saba,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> and farther countries in the east; and by means of a</span>
							<br/>
							<span>swift spirit that I have, I had them brought hither, as you see.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>—How do you like them, madam? be they good?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Believe me, Master Doctor, they be the best grapes that</span>
							<br/>
							<span>e’er I tasted in my life before.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I am glad they content you so, madam.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, madam, let us in, where you must well reward this</span>
							<br/>
							<span>learned man for the great kindness he hath shewed to you.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duchess</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>And so I will, my lord; and, whilst I live, rest</span>
							<br/>
							<span>beholding<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a> for this courtesy.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I humbly thank your grace.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Come, Master Doctor, follow us, and receive your reward.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Wagner.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wagner</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I think my master means to die shortly,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For he hath given to me all his goods:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>And yet, methinks, if that death were near,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He would not banquet, and carouse, and swill</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Amongst the students, as even now he doth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who are at supper with such belly-cheer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As Wagner ne’er beheld in all his life.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>See, where they come! belike the feast is ended.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Faustus with two or three Scholars, and Mephistophilis.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Master Doctor Faustus, since our conference about</span>
							<br/>
							<span>fair ladies, which was the beautifulest in all the world, we have</span>
							<br/>
							<span>determined with ourselves that Helen of Greece was the admirablest</span>
							<br/>
							<span>lady that ever lived: therefore, Master Doctor, if you will do us</span>
							<br/>
							<span>that favour, as to let us see that peerless dame of Greece, whom</span>
							<br/>
							<span>all the world admires for majesty, we should think ourselves much</span>
							<br/>
							<span>beholding unto you.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Gentlemen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For that I know your friendship is unfeign’d,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Faustus’ custom is not to deny</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The just requests of those that wish him well,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No otherways for pomp and majesty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than when Sir Paris cross’d the seas with her,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Be silent, then, for danger is in words.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Music sounds, and Helen passeth over the stage. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whom all the world admires for majesty.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>No marvel though the angry Greeks pursu’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With ten years’ war the rape of such a queen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose heavenly beauty passeth all compare.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Since we have seen the pride of Nature’s works,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And only paragon of excellence,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Let us depart; and for this glorious deed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Happy and blest be Faustus evermore!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Gentlemen, farewell: the same I wish to you.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Scholars.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter an Old Man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, Doctor Faustus, that I might prevail</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To guide thy steps unto the way of life,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By which sweet path thou mayst attain the goal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That shall conduct thee to celestial rest!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Break heart, drop blood, and mingle it with tears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tears falling from repentant heaviness</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of thy most vile<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a> and loathsome filthiness,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The stench whereof corrupts the inward soul</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With such flagitious crimes of heinous sin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>As no commiseration may expel,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But mercy, Faustus, of thy Saviour sweet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose blood alone must wash away thy guilt.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Where art thou, Faustus? wretch, what hast thou done?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Damn’d art thou, Faustus, damn’d; despair and die!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voice</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Says, “Faustus, come; thine hour is almost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a> come;”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Faustus now<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> will come to do thee right.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mephistophilis gives him a dagger.</i>
							</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I see an angel hovers o’er thy head,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, with a vial full of precious grace,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Offers to pour the same into thy soul:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then call for mercy, and avoid despair.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, my sweet friend, I feel</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thy words to comfort my distressed soul!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>I go, sweet Faustus; but with heavy cheer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fearing the ruin of thy hopeless soul.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Accursed Faustus, where is mercy now?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I do repent; and yet I do despair:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What shall I do to shun the snares of death?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For disobedience to my sovereign lord:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Revolt, or I’ll in piece-meal tear thy flesh.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Sweet Mephistophilis, entreat thy lord</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To pardon my unjust presumption,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And with my blood again I will confirm</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My former vow I made to Lucifer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Do it, then, quickly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a> with unfeigned heart,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lest greater danger do attend thy drift.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Torment, sweet friend, that base and crooked age,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With greatest torments that our hell affords.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>His faith is great; I cannot touch his soul;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But what I may afflict his body with</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I will attempt, which is but little worth.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>One thing, good servant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a> let me crave of thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To glut the longing of my heart’s desire⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I might have unto my paramour</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose sweet embracings may extinguish clean</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Those<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a> thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mephistophilis</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, this,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> or what else thou shalt desire,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall be perform’d in twinkling of an eye.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Helen.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Was this the face that launch’d a thousand ships,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And burnt the topless<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> towers of Ilium⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her lips suck forth my soul: see, where it flies!⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here will I dwell, for heaven is<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> in these lips,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all is dross that is not Helena.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I will be Paris, and for love of thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Instead of Troy, shall Wertenberg be sack’d;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I will combat with weak Menelaus,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And wear thy colours on my plumed crest;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then return to Helen for a kiss.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, thou art fairer than the evening air</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When he appear’d to hapless Semele;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More lovely than the monarch of the sky</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In wanton Arethusa’s azur’d arms;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And none but thou shalt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> be my paramour!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the Old Man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Accursed Faustus, miserable man,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That from thy soul exclud’st the grace of heaven,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And fly’st the throne of his tribunal-seat!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Devils.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Satan begins to sift me with his pride:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As in this furnace God shall try my faith,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My faith, vile hell, shall triumph over thee.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ambitious fiends, see how the heavens smile</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At your repulse, and laugh your state to scorn!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hence, hell! for hence I fly unto my God.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt⁠—on one side, Devils, on the other, Old Man.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Faustus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a> with Scholars.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, gentlemen!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What ails Faustus?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, my sweet chamber-fellow, had I lived with thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>then had I lived still! but now I die eternally. Look, comes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>he not? comes he not?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>What means Faustus?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Belike he is grown into some sickness by being</span>
							<br/>
							<span>over-solitary.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>If it be so, we’ll have physicians to cure him.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>—’Tis but a surfeit; never fear, man.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>A surfeit of deadly sin, that hath damned both body</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and soul.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yet, Faustus, look up to heaven; remember God’s</span>
							<br/>
							<span>mercies are infinite.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>But Faustus’ offence can ne’er be pardoned: the serpent</span>
							<br/>
							<span>that tempted Eve may be saved, but not Faustus. Ah, gentlemen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>hear me with patience, and tremble not at my speeches! Though</span>
							<br/>
							<span>my heart pants and quivers to remember that I have been a student</span>
							<br/>
							<span>here these thirty years, O, would I had never seen Wertenberg,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>never read book! and what wonders I have done, all Germany can</span>
							<br/>
							<span>witness, yea, all the world; for which Faustus hath lost both</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Germany and the world, yea, heaven itself, heaven, the seat of</span>
							<br/>
							<span>God, the throne of the blessed, the kingdom of joy; and must</span>
							<br/>
							<span>remain in hell for ever, hell, ah, hell, for ever! Sweet friends,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>what shall become of Faustus, being in hell for ever?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Yet, Faustus, call on God.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>On God, whom Faustus hath abjured! on God, whom Faustus</span>
							<br/>
							<span>hath blasphemed! Ah, my God, I would weep! but the devil draws in</span>
							<br/>
							<span>my tears. Gush forth blood, instead of tears! yea, life and soul!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, he stays my tongue! I would lift up my hands; but see, they</span>
							<br/>
							<span>hold them, they hold them!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Who, Faustus?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Lucifer and Mephistophilis. Ah, gentlemen, I gave them</span>
							<br/>
							<span>my soul for my cunning!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a></span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>God forbid!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>God forbade it, indeed; but Faustus hath done it: for</span>
							<br/>
							<span>vain pleasure of twenty-four years hath Faustus lost eternal joy</span>
							<br/>
							<span>and felicity. I writ them a bill with mine own blood: the date</span>
							<br/>
							<span>is expired; the time will come, and he will fetch me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Why did not Faustus tell us of this before,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>that divines might have prayed for thee?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Oft have I thought to have done so; but the devil</span>
							<br/>
							<span>threatened to tear me in pieces, if I named God, to fetch both</span>
							<br/>
							<span>body and soul, if I once gave ear to divinity: and now ’tis too</span>
							<br/>
							<span>late. Gentlemen, away, lest you perish with me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>O, what shall we do to save<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> Faustus?</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Talk not of me, but save yourselves, and depart.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>God will strengthen me; I will stay with Faustus.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Tempt not God, sweet friend; but let us into the</span>
							<br/>
							<span>next room, and there pray for him.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ay, pray for me, pray for me; and what noise soever</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ye hear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> come not unto me, for nothing can rescue me.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Scholar</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Pray thou, and we will pray that God may have</span>
							<br/>
							<span>mercy upon thee.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Gentlemen, farewell: if I live till morning, I’ll visit</span>
							<br/>
							<span>you; if not, Faustus is gone to hell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Faustus, farewell.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Scholars.⁠—The clock strikes eleven.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faustus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Ah, Faustus,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now hast thou but one bare hour to live,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then thou must be damn’d perpetually!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stand still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That time may cease, and midnight never come;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fair Nature’s eye, rise, rise again, and make</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Perpetual day; or let this hour be but</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A year, a month, a week, a natural day,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That Faustus may repent and save his soul!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O lente,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> lente currite, noctis equi!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The stars move still, time runs, the clock will strike,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The devil will come, and Faustus must be damn’d.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, I’ll leap up to my God!⁠—Who pulls me down?⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>See, see, where Christ’s blood streams in the firmament!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>One drop would save my soul, half a drop: ah, my Christ!⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ah, rend not my heart for naming of my Christ!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet will I call on him: O, spare me, Lucifer!⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where is it now? ’tis gone: and see, where God</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stretcheth out his arm, and bends his ireful brows!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mountains and hills, come, come, and fall on me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And hide me from the heavy wrath of God!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No, no!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then will I headlong run into the earth:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Earth, gape! O, no, it will not harbour me!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You stars that reign’d at my nativity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now draw up Faustus, like a foggy mist.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Into the entrails of yon labouring clouds,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That, when you<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> vomit forth into the air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So that my soul may but ascend to heaven!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The clock strikes the half-hour.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ah, half the hour is past! ’twill all be past anon</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O God,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If thou wilt not have mercy on my soul,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet for Christ’s sake, whose blood hath ransom’d me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Impose some end to my incessant pain;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A hundred thousand, and at last be sav’d!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, no end is limited to damned souls!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or why is this immortal that thou hast?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ah, Pythagoras’ metempsychosis, were that true,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This soul should fly from me, and I be chang’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unto some brutish beast!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> all beasts are happy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For, when they die,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their souls are soon dissolv’d in elements;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But mine must live still to be plagu’d in hell.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Curs’d be the parents that engender’d me!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No, Faustus, curse thyself, curse Lucifer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That hath depriv’d thee of the joys of heaven.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The clock strikes twelve.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, it strikes, it strikes! Now, body, turn to air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or Lucifer will bear thee quick to hell!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Thunder and lightning.</i>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O soul, be chang’d into little water-drops,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And fall into the ocean, ne’er be found!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Devils.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>My God, my god, look not so fierce on me!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ugly hell, gape not! come not, Lucifer!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll burn my books!⁠—Ah, Mephistophilis!</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Devils with Faustus. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Chorus.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
					<td>
						<p>
							<span>Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And burned is Apollo’s laurel-bough,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That sometime grew within this learned man.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Faustus is gone: regard his hellish fall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Only to wonder at unlawful things,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To practice more than heavenly power permits.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>
				<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Terminat hora diem; terminat auctor opus.</i>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
